Home Visitation Mediation Divorce Mediation Family Schools Community Specialty Programs Training Events News Job Postings Newsletter About Contact Pay Now Donate Training Cayuga County (315) 252-4260 More Info Livingston County (585) 243-7008 More Info Monroe County (585) 546-5110 More Info Ontario County (585) 396-0840 More Info Seneca County (315) 539-4570 More Info Steuben County (607) 776-6976 More Info Wayne County (315) 946-6159 More Info Yates County (315) 531-3409 More Info Error message Training Customized Training can customize training for your school, organization, business or government agency in the following areas: Conflict Resolution Conflict Skills Training Responding to Workplace Disputes Building Positive Organizational Culture Mediation Basic Mediation Training Custody Visitation Mediation Peer Mediation Anger Management Restorative Practices These can be tailored for adults and youth designated to serve in a leadership capacity within your to provide conflict resolution and restorative practices services to their colleagues and peers. Anger Management Anger Management training provides strategies communications) to help participants of all ages understand their negative feelings and equips them with the tools to manage their behavior and avoid conflict. This training explores anger and its association with conflict and provides an understanding of the impact of both anger and conflict on human behavior and human interaction. In this training participants will: Examine the phases of anger Explore the feelings associated with conflict that lead to anger Identify situations that anger Identify and practice healthy strategies to effectively manage anger Conflict Resolution Conflict Resolution is a constructive approach to interpersonal and conflicts that helps people with opposing positions work together to arrive at mutually acceptable solutions. This interactive curriculum Identifies personal styles of conflict management Examine beliefs and attitudes about conflict resolution Explores the use of effective communication as a means of resolving conflict Examines various methods used in conflict resolution Examines conflict and how it relates to everyday life Diversity Training This workshop explores the meaning of diversity and inclusion and the impact communications within a diverse society can have on conflict. In this highly interactive training participants will: Develop an appreciation for the of understanding, managing and resolving conflict Learn the importance of leveraging diversity and creating an inclusive to reduce the potential for conflict Explore effective conflict management techniques for the workplace Develop an appreciation for the value of diversity Basic Principles of Mediation The Center for Dispute Settlement offers basic training in the Principles of Mediation from a orientation. This dynamic training is based on the experiential learning model and provides participants with a working knowledge of the mediation process as well as the skills necessary to effectively mediate various community issues. Topical areas covered in this training include: Understanding Conflict Active Listening Empowerment Recognition Mediator Standards of Conduct For more information contact Pollack at or phone (585) 546-5110 ext. 113. Become a Mediator We accept applications on a rolling basis for people interested in becoming a certified volunteer mediator in one of our eight counties. All of our mediators are required to complete a training followed by an apprenticeship leading to certification as a volunteer community mediator. Once certified, mediators are expected to volunteer for three mediation cases per year, as well as complete 6 hours of per year. While the commitment is substantial, it is the knowledge, skills and personal satisfaction our volunteers receive that makes this work so rewarding. Contact Pollack at for more information. Cayuga Livingston Monroe Ontario Seneca Steuben Wayne Yates (585) 546-5110 Reynolds Arcade Building Suite 800 (Eighth Floor) 16 East Main Street Rochester, NY 14614 Fax: (585) 546-4391 Programs Custody and Visitation Mediation Divorce Mediation Family Schools Community Specialty Programs Training Training Customized Training Anger Management Conflict Resolution Diversity Training Mediation Training Other Links Home Programs News About Contact Pay My Bill Donate Login Reset Password Copyright 2023, The Center for Dispute Settlement. Theme by 