Mediation Centers CLUSTER offers the ability to mediate via Zoom (an online meeting platform) for parties experiencing conflict for all types of cases including neighbor to neighbor issues. We will continue to conduct intake assessments over the phone and are working with the courts to ensure we will be available to mediate any of the cases that may be in their inventory. If you feel you may benefit from mediation, please contact Our Mediation Centers provide dispute resolution services and training to residents, businesses, and community organizations. We provide Mediation Services and related in a variety of areas including: Community Dispute Resolution Divorce, Custody and Visitation Workplace, Restorative Justice School Peer Mediation Child Permanency Mediation Special Education Mediation Eviction Prevention. Estates, including Probates, Administrations, With offices in Yonkers and Spring Valley we assist over 3,000 individuals annually, by mediating, conciliating or referring them to more appropriate services. All services of the and Mediation Center are provided either free of charge or based on a sliding scale. Donations are always welcomed, as we are a non-profit organization. What is mediation? Mediation is a dynamic, structured, interactive process where a third party assists disputing parties in resolving conflict through the use of specialized communication and negotiation techniques. All participants are encouraged to actively participate in the process. This process is focused primarily upon the needs, rights, and interests of the parties. The mediator uses a wide variety of techniques to guide the process in a constructive direction and to help the parties find their optimal solution. When is mediation appropriate? As long as all parties agree to come to mediation, and there is no history of violence or abuse between them, mediation is appropriate. Center staff can help the participants determine who should be in attendance to have an effective mediation. Who are the mediators? Our mediators are members of the local community who come from varied backgrounds. Our panel is made up of attorneys, educators, judges, homemakers, business professionals, all of whom have taken at least the mediation course mandated by the Unified Court System followed by a year-long apprenticeship. Most have taken much supplemental and have many years of mediation experience. Our Services Mediation Centers Services Calculator Training FAQs Resources Mental Health Residential Services Programs Resources Youth Family Programs Programs Resources Housing Resource Center Services Resources 