Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System 7th JUDICIAL DISTRICT 7th JD Home Accessibility (ADA) Statewide Info Local ADA Info Emergency Weather Info Alternative Dispute Resolution Appellate 4th Attorneys Courts by County City Cayuga Cayuga County Auburn City Court Livingston County Monroe Monroe County Rochester City Court Ontario Ontario County City Court Geneva City Court Seneca County Steuben Steuben County Corning City Court City Court Wayne County Yates County Courts by Type City Auburn Corning Geneva Rochester Family Cayuga Livingston Monroe Ontario Seneca Steuben Wayne Yates Supreme Cayuga Livingston Monroe Ontario Seneca Steuben Wayne Yates Surrogate Town Village By County Monroe Ontario Seneca Wayne General District Info Job Postings Employment Mailing List Public Access Guide to Court Proceedings Records A.C.T. For the Children Judges Rules Judicial Directory Judges Rules Jurors Cayuga County Livingston County Monroe County Ontario County Seneca County Steuben County Wayne County Yates County Law Libraries Litigants SCAR Public Access to Virtual Appearances Child Victims Act and Adult Survivors Act Matters The 7th and 8th Judicial Districts offer both Mediation and Restorative Justice processes to help address Child Victims Act and Adult Survivors Act matters. These Alternative Dispute Resolution opportunities can assist parties in finding an acceptable resolution or a plan to move forward using structured negotiation or facilitated discussions instead of trial. Process Parties can agree to use either confidential process at any time or the court may refer matters to mediation. Due to the nature of the cases some meetings involve only party representatives or proxies. The process is uniquely designed for each case based on each party’s needs and preferences. If you believe your case would benefit from Mediation or Restorative Justice, you can discuss it with the assigned judge and request or contact the Coordinator in your district to further explore options. Mediation An process in which a neutral third party (referred to as a mediator) helps parties communicate, identify issues, clarify perceptions, and explore options for a mutually acceptable outcome. Restorative Justice Restorative Justice focuses on addressing the impact of harm caused by another person. It usually takes place through a series of facilitated direct or indirect conversations in which those harmed and those taking responsibility for harm, together with impacted communities in some circumstances, work through the needs and obligations flowing from that harm and how to address the impact and related or consequential needs resulting from that harm. 7th Judicial District Cayuga, Livingston, Monroe, Ontario, Seneca, Steuben, Wayne, Yates Coordinator: Amy Esq. Mediation Court Mediators Roster of Mediators Restorative Justice Local Community Dispute Resolution Center Center for Dispute Settlement 8th Judicial District Chautauqua, Erie, Niagara, Orleans, Wyoming Coordinator: Audrey Herman, Esq. Mediation Court Mediators Roster of Mediators Restorative Justice Community Dispute Resolution Center Center for Dispute Settlement In consultation with 8th JD Local Child Family Services Center for Resolution and Justice Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 