Skip to main content Notices: Magistrate Judge Vacancy Notice Application- NYC Hide alert Toggle navigation Main navigation Response to About Courthouses About the District Court Holidays History Fees Payment Information News Events Directory Legal Assistance Clinic Human Resources Attorneys Admission Pro Bono Pro Resources for Attorneys Forms Resources for Attorneys Request Attorney Records Application to Bring an Electronic Device Into the Courthouse Cases Rulings of Special Interest Litigation PACER Requesting Court Records Sealed Records Filing Instructions Forms Judges Judges Judges U.S. District Judges U.S. Magistrate Part 1 Schedule Law Clerk Hiring Info Jurors Jury Duty Jury Duty FAQ Directions Handbook Emergency Contact Pro Se Pro Se (Self Representation) Pro Se Law Resources Case Filing Appearing without an Attorney Services for Pro Se Forms (Pro Se) Legal Assistance Clinic Programs Training Serve as Pro Bono Counsel Judgment Naturalization Mediation Young Adult Opportunity Program Probation The RISE Court Rules 2nd Circuit Judicial Misconduct Procedures Local Rules Rules and Instructions Proposed Amendments Misconduct Procedures Trial Support Court Courtroom Technology Pretrial Services Probation Home Programs and Services Of the Court The mission of the Mediation Program of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York is to provide quality dispute resolution services at the earliest practicable stage. The program is comprised of mediators with a diverse range of experiences and backgrounds, who share the goals of providing parties with opportunities for supported negotiation, exploration of legal and factual issues, creative thinking, and settlement through mediation. The program is an educational resource for the bench, bar, and larger community about the uses and benefits of mediation and other dispute resolution processes. By creating protocols, the program evolves in response to the Court's changing docket. The Mediation Program supports the continuing growth and development of professional mediators, and provides opportunities for observation, training, and evaluation for both experienced neutrals and those newer to mediation practice. What is Mediation? In mediation, all participants meet with a neutral third party (the mediator) who has been trained to facilitate confidential settlement discussions. Participants include attorneys, parties (whether or not they have a lawyer), and insurance representatives. The mediator assists the parties in reaching their own negotiated settlement by defining the issues, probing and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of each legal positions, and identifying areas of agreement and disagreement. The main benefits of mediation are that it can result in an expeditious and less costly resolution of the litigation, and can produce creative solutions to complex disputes often unavailable in traditional litigation. At the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York the Mediation Program is governed by Local Civil Rule 83.9 and the Mediation Program Procedures. The Court periodically develops case management and protocols and currently has such protocols for: counseled employment discrimination cases, certain cases and certain 1983 police misconduct claims. Local Rules Judges Getting Here New York Getting Here White Plains Court Directory Zoom Manual for Mediators and Participants Post Mediation Surveys Reports Attorney Survey Mediator Report Survey Mediators List of Mediators Mediation Program Volunteer Application and Instructions Mediation Diversity Statement Mediation Evaluation Program Program Introduction Program Evaluation Forms City Evaluation Program Report Mediation Preparation Tips for Counsel Preparing for Mediation: A Resource for Advocates FAQ Click on a question to see the answer. If a participant does not speak English, does the Court provide interpreters for mediation? The Court only provides interpreters for mediation when the plaintiff is the U.S. Government or when an interpreter is required in American Sign Language. In some instances the Mediation Office may be able to locate a panel mediator who is able to mediate in languages other than English. Requests that the office attempt to find a panel mediator with specific language expertise should be made immediately after the parties are ordered to mediation. Where do take place and how are rooms reserved? Mediation sessions may take place at the mediator's office, at the Courthouse, or at any other location agreed to by the mediator and the parties. Mediation rooms in the courthouses in Manhattan or White Plans are reserved by Mediation Office staff. Can I bring my cell device into the Court for mediation? Any attorney can present appropriate verification of membership of the bar of any state or federal court to bring in one cell phone. Attorneys who wish to bring in additional devices such as a tablet or computer must submit an Electronic Device Order which can be found here: Devices General To ensure timely processing, these orders must be submitted to the Mediation Office at least 72 hours before the date of the mediation session. What if someone needs to reach me while in mediation without my phone? If someone needs to be reached during mediation, they should provide the Mediation Office number (212) 805-0643 to anyone who may need it. This office is staffed from 8:30 am 5:00 pm from Monday to Friday and mediation staff will promptly relay any messages to mediation participants. The mediation rooms all have phones that mediation participants can use to return calls. Can people participate in mediation by phone or video conference? The Mediation Program Procedures require in person attendance in most circumstances. If your case falls within one of the exceptions for in person attendance, or your mediator has agreed to allow participation by phone or video conference, please contact the Mediation Office to make arrangements at least three weeks in advance of your scheduled mediation date. Can I play a DVD or videotape in mediation? Yes. Please contact the Mediation Office at least three weeks in advance of your scheduled mediation date to request the appropriate equipment. You should also provide your mediator with the footage so that it can be viewed in advance of the mediation. How are mediators selected? Mediators are randomly selected by the Mediation Office from a list of panel mediators who have the subject matter mediation expertise that is relevant to a particular case. Is there a transcript or can I record mediation sessions? No. Mediation sessions are confidential. Any exceptions to confidentiality are detailed in the Mediation Program Procedures. Does the Court appoint counsel for pro (unrepresented) litigants in mediation? In certain cases the Court will appoint pro (free) counsel for pro (unrepresented) parties only for mediation. Any requests for appointment of counsel should be made to the presiding judge. Find an Attorney It is advisable to proceed in Federal Court with an attorney. Learn More Mediation Contact Information Mediation Office United States District Court Southern District of New York 40 Foley Square, Suite 120 New York, New York 10007 (212) 805-0643 FAQ Court Links United States Court of Appeals Court of International Trade Bankruptcy NY State Courts More Getting Here New York White Plains Mediation Rules Procedures Local Civil Rule 83.9 Mediation Program Procedures (8/7/2023) Standing Order for Employment Cases Pilot Program 1983 White Plains Pilot Program Local Civil Rule 83.10 (formerly the 1983 Plan) Mediation Forms Electronic Devices General Purpose Confidentiality Agreement (as of 9/15/2023) Confidentiality Agreement in Spanish (as of 9/15/2023) Mediation Referral Order Mediator Report and Survey Electronic Device Order Mediation Program Annual Reports Annual Report 2022 Report for 2019-2021 Annual Report 2017-2019 Annual Report 2016 Annual Report 2015 Annual Report 2014 Annual Report 2013 Privacy Policy Court Directory Accessibility Your Employee Rights and How to Report Wrongful Conduct Contact Us Sitemap Daniel Patrick Daniel Patrick United States Courthouse 500 Pearl Street New York, NY 10007 1312 Hon. Charles L. Jr. Hon. Charles L. Jr. Federal Building and Courthouse 300 Street White Plains, NY 10601 Marshall Marshall United States Courthouse 40 Foley Square New York, NY 10007 United States Courthouse 355 Main Street NY 12601 United States District Court Southern District of New York 