Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System 2nd JD Civil Term, Kings Supreme Court Accessibility (ADA) Statewide Info Local ADA Info Departments Part 72 Fiduciary Part 36 Foreclosures Foreclosure Sales Guardianship Help Center Matrimonial Divorce Mental Hygiene Support Trial Support Subpoenaed Records General Info Attorney Secure Pass Directions Find Your Next Court Date Frequently Asked Questions General Forms General Information Judges Rules Alternative Dispute Resolution Discovery Part Rules Foreclosure Auction Rules Judges' Part Rules Kings Civil Supreme Rules Summary Jury Trial Rules Commercial Division Electronic Filing Law Library Links What's New? Contact Us Building Directory Building Directory Phone Public Access to Virtual Appearances Overview Administration Address: 360 Adams Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Administrative Judge for Civil Matters Hon. Lawrence 347-296-1200 Chief Clerk, Civil Term Charles A. Small, Esq. 347-296-1800 Hours of Operation: Monday Friday 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Notices Until Further Notice Judge will be presiding over the Central Compliance Conference Part motion calendar. All motions will be taken on submission. ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER REGARDING NOTES OF ISSUE City Discovery Part This discovery part hears all discovery motions, preliminary conferences, and compliance conferences. The courtroom is in room 365. The part begins at 9:30 AM. Mandatory For Commercial Actions is mandatory for all commercial actions where the amount in controversy is $150,000.00 or more. For more information, see "Electronic Filing" in the left menu. Welcome As the Administrative Judge for Civil Matters, I take this opportunity to welcome you to the official website of the Kings County Supreme Court, Civil Term. This courthouse is equipped to handle all non-criminal matters, including name changes, matrimonial matters, foreclosures, mental hygiene applications, elder law cases, and all other civil litigation. Kings County is the busiest civil term in New York State and we are committed to making it the most as well. That commitment is reflected by our courteous and dedicated staff and this website. It is our intention to provide quality service to attorneys and all litigants, whether or not you are represented by counsel. If you are not represented by counsel and need assistance, please visit our Kings Supreme Court Help Center in Room Please also be aware that the County Clerk's Office and Surrogate's Court are located in this building. Our goal is to make your court experience as smooth and uncomplicated as possible, and we welcome any comments you may have. Administrative Judge for Civil Matters Administrative Judge for Civil Matters 2nd Judicial District Hon. Lawrence Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 