Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System NEW YORK STATE COURT OF CLAIMS Home Accessibility (ADA) Instructions Filing Page Fax Filing Instructions Cover Sheet Practice Court of Claims Act Uniform Rules Motion Practice Forms Courtroom Technology Overview Albany, NYC, Syracuse Buffalo Rochester White Plains Wireless Internet Access Decisions Overview Searchable Database New York Official Reports Trial Transcripts Links of Interest Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us Clerk of the Court Judges' Chambers Overview Fax Filing Update Effective September 1, 2021, the Court of Claims can no longer accept payment of filing fees by fax. The $50.00 filing fee must be paid in advance using the Court's online payment system. For Claims to be filed by fax beginning September 1, 2021: Prior to filing a Claim, please visit the online payment page at and complete payment. Once payment is completed, a number will be generated. Please include the number in the appropriate field on the Filing Fax Cover Sheet when faxing the Claim. **CLAIMS SUBMITTED WITHOUT CONFIRMATION OF ONLINE PAYMENT WILL NOT BE FILED** Electronic Filing Update New York State Electronic Filing System Pursuant to the Administrative Order of Acting Presiding Judge Richard E. effective February 23, 2021, all categories of claims in all districts of the Court of Claims are eligible for electronic filing in the New York State Electronic Filing System Please note: Motions for Permission to File Late Claims, other applications and Special Proceedings 304 [E] distribution proceedings) are not eligible for at this time. The Electronic Document Delivery System allows you to electronically deliver the following items to the court: PDF of a Trial Exhibit (at the direction of the Court only), Stipulation or Letter Application to Convert a claim to Documents related to a Motion for Permission to File a Late Claim or other application, and Documents related to a Special Proceedings 304 [E] distribution proceeding). Please note: does not replace and may not substitute for filing under the New York State Courts Electronic Filing System Therefore, it should not be used in matters where is available. View the Notice for more information. If you do not have a lawyer and have not made your court papers, visit the website or the Forms page. Send a Document with Welcome The New York State Court of Claims is the exclusive forum for civil litigation seeking damages against the State of New York or certain other entities such as the New York State Thruway Authority, the City University of New York, the Olympic Regional Development Authority, the Roswell Park Cancer Institute Corporation and the New York State Power Authority (claims for the appropriation of real property only). The Court of Claims has no jurisdiction over any city, county or town government, or over any individual defendant. For information on New York law generally, see Cornell Law School's Legal Information Institute's New York page. Those unfamiliar with the Court of Claims should start by reading the Frequently Asked Questions. Administration Address Robert Abrams Building for Law Justice P.O. Box 7344 Capitol Station Albany, NY 12224 Phone 518-432-3411 Acting Presiding Judge Richard E. Chief Clerk Eileen F. Hours of Operation Monday Friday 9:00 a.m. 5:00 p.m. (except State holidays) What's New Practice Alert 22 206.5 Rule 206.5 Papers Filed with the Court has been amended to add a new subsection (e) requiring attorneys to omit or redact certain confidential personal information from court filings in the Court of Claims. This rule is effective as of April 15, 2015 and applies to both and cases. Please refer to the site for information for claims. A recommended Redaction Cover Page form is available for use by parties filing court documents subject to the rule. In addition, a Unified Court System training video, addressing the corresponding Supreme and County Court rule (22 is available. Training Video: Public Access Version (Run time: 43 minutes) Internal version with transcripts (login with Microsoft account) Important The Clerk's office does not accept submissions for filing via e-mail. This is NOT Small Claims court. Information on Small Claims courts may be obtained at the following sites: Small Claims in N.Y. City Small Claims outside of N.Y. City The forms provided at this site are unofficial and They are designed primarily for (pro claimants. They are PDF documents and require Adobe Acrobat Reader. Important Notice about "Scam" Emails Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 