Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION Home What Is Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution Find a Mediator Services for Court Cases Mediation Other Processes Become a Mediator Neutral Qualifications Volunteer Mediator Application Training and Education Find a Training Trainer Resources Community Dispute Resolution Centers Services Find a Volunteer Publications and Resources Practitioner Resources Contact Us About Us Mediator Complaints Mediator Complaints The New York State Unified Court System is committed to ensuring a quality process for all participants in a mediation. We welcome input from anyone who has concerns about their mediator. To make a complaint about your mediator, please contact the District Administrative Judge. If you need help, you may ask your local Coordinator. Find the email address for your Coordinator. Please do not use this complaint process if your complaint is about the mediator’s fee; about something other than the mediator’s behavior or actions; or if it is after 60 days from the date that you last mediated or spoke with your mediator. Exception to the restriction: if you discovered the mediator misconduct after the 60 days, you can make your complaint and also explain why you were unable to discover the alleged misconduct until after 60 days from the date you last mediated or spoke with the mediator. Decision Process The District Administrative Judge will review your complaint and make a decision in a way the District Administrative Judge thinks is appropriate. The District Administrative Judge may contact the mediator, you, the other person in your case, court staff, or the local Coordinator. The District Administrative Judge can also ask a committee of mediation experts for recommendations. Types of Decisions The District Administrative Judge can decide that the mediator should: 1. Take further training; and/ or 2. Be observed mediating by an experienced mediator; and/ or 3. Stop mediating for the court until the mediator gets more training, experience or guidance; and/ or 4. Stop mediating for the court completely; The District Administrative Judge can also make other decisions about the mediator. After the District Administrative Judge Makes a Decision Once the District Administrative Judge makes a decision, the Coordinator may notify you. The District Administrative Judge’s decision is final. Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 