Community Mediation Services Developing life skills, improving relationships, and accomplishing positive outcomes. BUILDING STRONGER FAMILIES COMMUNITIES BUILDING STRONGER FAMILIES COMMUNITIES holistic care approach, conflict resolution, mediation and preventive services empower communities by addressing specific needs and promoting personal growth and Our Mission Donate now Uniting families. Empowering communities. Growing together. Welcome to Community Mediation Services a organization that provides programs for individuals, youth, and families facing life’s challenges. Our team of professionals and volunteers are committed to bringing communities, institutions, and stakeholders together to resolve conflicts and build strong relationships. At we offer a range of services, including violence prevention, housing insecurity, court diversion, mental health services, specialized educational programs, services, and a network of mediation and conflict resolution programs. We aim to help clients develop essential life skills, strengthen relationships, and achieve positive outcomes. We believe everyone deserves a fair chance to navigate life’s obstacles, and we are here to provide the support and guidance needed to make that possible. Whether you are struggling with personal issues or facing conflicts with others, is here to help you find the solutions you need to move forward. So if you’re looking for a reliable and compassionate partner to help you navigate life’s challenges, look no further than Community Mediation Services. We are here to serve you and help you achieve your goals. About Us Volunteer Hours Resolving Conflicts Annually Receive Shelter, Food Support Daily Receive Support In Workforce Programs Monthly Our Services is dedicated to making our services available to all individuals in need, without turning anyone away. Our committed field professionals work closely with the community to ensure that the diverse needs of everyone are met. We strive for accessibility in terms of language, location, and programming, aiming to provide services that are easily accessible to those in need. Family Our Family Services Division is comprised of three distinct programs that stabilize families, keep them together and focus on Learn More Mediation We are an undisputed leader in providing unparalleled assistance for resolving conflicts justly and securely within the community. Learn More Community Our team of highly trained experts offers specialized mediation programs and training courses tailored to each situation’s unique needs. Learn More Education Enrolling in educational programs can unlock your full potential for success and achieve positive outcomes today tomorrow. Learn More Justice Our comprehensive justice programs are designed as an Alternative to Incarceration for young people between the ages of 13-24. Learn More Housing Our Sanctuary Housing program provides a refuge for those facing housing insecurity, including migrant populations. Learn More OUR COMMITMENT TO THE COMMUNITY is dedicated to making our services available to all individuals in need, without turning anyone away. Our committed field professionals work closely with the community to ensure that the diverse needs of everyone are met. We strive for accessibility in terms of language, location, and programming, aiming to provide services that are easily accessible to those in need. Our dedicated team works tirelessly to assist individuals in navigating complex legal systems and overcoming language barriers, ensuring equal access to resources and opportunities. By working with the community, we aim to foster unity and empower neighborhoods to become safer, healthier, and more vibrant. We are committed to ensuring the community can thrive through careers, housing and stable food sources. Our job readiness programs have a completion rate of 82%, which includes participation in over 24 workshops focused on work development. Over 50% of our participants obtain employment afterwards, with the caveat that some individuals who are not actively seeking employment are included in this statistic, which may slightly distort the overall numbers. The team prioritizes creating a safe and secure environment for individuals of all ages, including youth and seniors, through our programming. Our compassionate team is here to assist, advocate, and provide support to those in shelters. We prioritize connecting individuals with relevant resources and services to address their specific needs. We embrace and celebrate the diversity of New York City, recognizing that each community has its own set of challenges and strengths. Our dedicated team of professionals, with their expertise and cultural competence, is equipped to provide tailored solutions that meet the unique needs of each community. By embracing diversity and working collaboratively, we ensure that our services are inclusive and culturally sensitive, creating positive impact and lasting change. We take pride in our youth and family services, offering more than just a name. With our training capabilities, expertise, and pragmatic approach, we make decisions based on the thoughts and needs of the community. We offer a range of services that go beyond expectations, ensuring that the services provided are comprehensive and aligned with the specific needs of those we serve. Striving to make a meaningful impact on the lives of the individuals and families we serve throughout the five boroughs of New York City. Offering programs, crisis intervention, mentoring, coaching, and community engagement initiatives to address the unique needs of diverse communities throughout New York City. Providing holistic care approach and preventive mediation services empowers communities by addressing specific needs and promoting personal growth and Recent Events Fostering collaborative and thoughtful throughout New York beyond! Immigrant Services Immigrant Services Enrichment Outing Enrichment Outing Workforce Development Workforce Development Empowering Women Empowering Women VIEW OUR RECENT EVENTS LATEST ARTICLES BLOGS Together we make all the difference Community Mediation Services Stands United With Coalition Against NYC Department of Probation’s Decision to Suspend the Only Program Community Mediation Services Stands United With Coalition Against NYC Department of Probation’s Decision to Suspend the Only Program New York migrant crisis: Queens shelter targeted by protesters Access to Justice: Virtual Mediation Programs Advanced Mediation Training Coming Soon Mediation nonprofit eases conflict resolution VIEW ALL OUR ARTICLES Change a life today As long as poverty, injustice inequality persist, none of us can truly rest. It doesn’t take much to change a life, Get in touch today and start making the difference. VOLUNTEER DONATE NOW 