Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION Home What Is Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution Find a Mediator Services for Court Cases Mediation Other Processes Become a Mediator Neutral Qualifications Volunteer Mediator Application Training and Education Find a Training Trainer Resources Community Dispute Resolution Centers Services Find a Volunteer Publications and Resources Practitioner Resources Contact Us About Us Mediator Complaints Services help individuals, families, and communities in many types of situations. Parenting Plans and Child Support help separated parents make their own plans for how they will raise their children. help parents and grandparents talk about: who will make future decisions regarding the children (custody), how to share parenting time with each other (parenting plans), and how to handle child support responsibilities. services have been shown to improve communication between and support collaborative relationships that positively impact children. Families can use services whether or not they have a case in court. Unified Court System funds to provide free and services for families. mediation really helped in opening the lines of communication between my father and me. The mediators were skilled, compassionate and able to diffuse moments of tension. They helped to point out areas of agreement that we can build upon and said things that emphasized having our kids' best interests at --Custody and Parenting Plan client from Common Ground was my first time ever going to family court and I was unaware of the mediation services. I did not think that my ex and I would ever be able to come to an agreement. Mediation saved us both, and our child, a lot of pain, time, and money. I had many tears of relief at the end of mediation and was shocked that we were able to get there. Mediation is a blessing to --Custody and Parenting Plan client from the Center for Resolution and Justice Housing Services are a crucial resource in resolving housing disputes, so that: tenants can live in safe and secure homes, landlords can receive predictable income, and communities can reduce homelessness. The most commonly mediated situations include: rental payment, evictions, roommate and holder issues, property repair and maintenance, and security deposits. Tenants or landlords can request services whether or not they have a case in court. Unified Court System funds to provide free and services. were great! Thank you for this service; we are very grateful for the assistance we --Housing Services client from Catholic Charities Dispute Resolution Center in Montgomery County Financial and Contractual Disputes often help people resolve financial and contractual disputes. mediators help people discuss issues such as: small claims cases, car and equipment loans, unpaid bills, third party loans, damaged property, and concerns about the quality of repairs or other services. These cases typically involve consumers and merchants, but may also involve friends, family members, or neighbors whose relationships are strained by a financial dispute. People can request services whether or not they have a case in court. Unified Court System funds to provide free and mediation services. am very glad that I asked for mediation. I am glad I was able to use a process that was less contentious, less expensive, and highly Mediation client from Mediation Matters went as well as I could have expected and I thought they did an excellent job explaining the role of mediation, neutrality, confidentiality, and really helped to settle the --Attorney representing a Financial Mediation client from the Center for Resolution and Justice Other Family Issues provide an environment that encourage cooperative relationships for families facing difficult decisions or life transitions. can help families address: Disputes hosting a conversation between a young person and a parent to help repair a strained relationship. Families often discuss household responsibilities, behaviors, curfews, school attendance, and mutually respectful communication. Learn more about services for youth and facilitating challenging decisions about raising children, dividing property and other assets, and determining child and spousal support. Elder Adult Dialogue- assisting a family in discussing the care of an elderly family member. Families can discuss options for health care, legal and fiscal matters, and living arrangements, while supporting and maintaining important Wills- supporting families who are grieving the death of a loved one while also disagreeing about inheritances and the execution of a will. People can request services whether or not they have a case in court. Unified Court System funds to provide free and mediation services. mediation process was really wonderful. I highly recommend it to Mediation client from Center for Dispute Settlement being my first time in a situation like this, and zooming from Florida in the courtroom, I had two experienced, caring, efficient, and nonpartisan mediators. They made this experience, for this mediation client, a nice experience under the Contested Wills client from and Mediation Centers of CLUSTER Juvenile Justice assist youth to build strong, positive connections in their communities. work in collaboration with Departments of Social Services, Probation Departments, courts, and law enforcement to provide Restorative Programming for youth who have committed criminal offenses. By participating in these programs, youthful offenders learn how their actions have harmed others, find ways they can repair the harm they have done, and develop skills that contribute to the of their communities. Learn more about services for youth and families. Services services address school discipline issues, promote positive school climate, and support the of students. Training for School Staff and Teachers teaching students, teachers, and school administrators the conflict management techniques needed to have more supportive learning Peer Mediation training students to resolve disagreements and tension among their school mates and between students and Restorative Justice Implementation guiding schools in implementing restorative practices to improve school climate and decrease reliance on punitive discipline School Attendance Services helping students, families, and school staff develop plans for reducing student absenteeism. provide several different conflict resolution methods including mediation, conflict coaching, restorative justice, arbitration, and large group dialogue. Learn more about these methods and services. Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 