Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System 10th JD NASSAU COUNTY Nassau County 10th JD Home Accessibility (ADA) Statewide Info Local ADA Info Alternative Dispute Resolution Courts Supreme Court Matrimonial Center Surrogate's Court Family Court County Court District Court Long Beach City Court Glen Cove City Court District Administrative Office General District Info Court Information Center Directions Public Access Law Library NY Jurors Forms Specialty Parts Integrated Domestic Violence Foreclosures Commercial Division Youth Part Rules Court Information Phone Directories Supreme Court Matrimonial Center Surrogate's Court Family Court County Court District Court Long Beach City Court District Administrative Office Glen Cove City Court Statewide Info Employment Forms Public Access to Virtual Appearances Alternative Dispute Resolution for the 10th JD Nassau County STATEMENT OF POLICY is the policy of the Unified Court System to encourage the resolution of civil legal disputes by methods including mediation, arbitration, neutral evaluation, settlement practices, and summary jury trials. All civil actions or proceedings heard in the Supreme Court, Court of Claims, County Court, Family Court, Surrogate’s Court, District Court, City Court, and New York City Civil Court shall be eligible for early referral to an alternative dispute resolution process unless otherwise excluded pursuant to this Plan. Courts may refer parties to an process at any time after an action has been commenced and are encouraged to do so at the earliest appropriate Statement of Policy of the Chief Judge. CONTACT INFORMATION Vivienne 100 Supreme Court Drive, Room 113 New York 11501 E-mail: QUICK LINKS What is presumptive What is District Programs Locate an Outside Provider Related Links Information for Neutrals WHAT IS PRESUMPTIVE In a presumptive Alternative Dispute Resolution referral model, parties are referred early on to utilize some form of such as arbitration, mediation, neutral evaluation, settlement conferencing or a special master. A referral can occur at any stage in a case, preferably early in the court process, before costs rise and positions harden. Some plans include a provision for parties to often for good cause, or exclude certain case types. Cases are continuously screened to support party safety and to assess case appropriateness for presumptive WHAT IS Alternative dispute resolution refers to a variety of processes that help parties resolve disputes without a trial. Typical processes include mediation, arbitration, neutral evaluation, and collaborative law. These processes are generally confidential, less formal, and less stressful than traditional court proceedings. Parties can use before filing a case or at any stage of the court proceeding. For more information on the different types of processes, to determine which process is most appropriate for your dispute, please visit The Unified Court System’s The Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution. ADVANTAGES OF Saves Time: is faster than going to trial. Saves Money: Parties can save on court costs, attorney’s fees, and witness fees. Control: Parties retain control by choosing the process and provider for voluntary Reduces Stress and Protects Privacy: is done outside the courtroom, in private offices, by phone or remotely. The proceedings remain confidential. Durability of agreement: It can produce more lasting agreements. It may preserve or improve relationships: This is especially important in conflicts involving families in which it is critical to preserve the relationship and foster ongoing communication. DISADVANTAGES OF If the parties do not resolve their dispute, they may have to pay for litigation and trial. does not provide a public trial or a decision by a judge or jury. DISTRICT PROGRAMS Quick Reference Summary of Nassau Supreme Programs SUPREME COURT EXPEDITED JURY TRIALS The Nassau County Expedited Jury Trial is an alternative way to provide parties with a jury trial in an accelerated time frame and without the expense of expert witnesses Motor vehicle serious injury cases make up the primary source for these trials, although other tort cases have gone to (Hon. R. Bruce and Hon. Sharon County Expedited Jury Nassau Lawyer, February 2019, p. 6). An expedited jury trial proceeds with strict time limits on jury selection and case presentation, including a limitation on the number of live witnesses. The goal is to have the trial completed in one day, although jury deliberation may be adjourned if necessary. The trial may be either non-binding or binding, depending on the agreement of the parties and order of the Court. Damages can be floored and capped on a basis by agreement of counsel and defendant may also agree to a concession of liability in the appropriate case. For more instructions on Nassau County Expedited Jury Trials please see Nassau County Expedited Jury Trial, Nassau Lawyer article. To schedule an Expedited Jury Trial, please contact Justice in the Calendar Control Part at (516) 493-3113. Expedited Jury Trial Stipulation SUPREME COURT COMMERCIAL DIVISION Pursuant to Commercial Division Rule counsel in Commercial Division matters are to confer prior to the Preliminary Conference in an attempt to identify a mutually agreeable plan. The are to consider either: (1) the appointment of a Roster Mediator through the Commercial Division Program; (2) the appointment of a Judge not assigned to the case to preside over a settlement conference or mediation within 30 days pursuant to Commercial Division Rule (3) settlement conference or mediation within 30 days before the assigned Judge; or (4) engagement of a private service at the expense. Commercial Division Program Rules (revised 2020) Order of Reference (printable) Initiation Form (printable) Attorney Certification Commercial Division Rule 10 Roster of Commercial Division Mediators (Spreadsheet must be downloaded to Roster of Commercial Division Mediators (Contact Info only; printable) Report of Neutral Survey (Commercial) SUPREME COURT MATRIMONIAL CENTER Matrimonial Center 400 County Seat Drive New York 11501 516-493-3444 (Clerk’s Office) At the Preliminary Conference the Court will conduct settlement negotiations between the parties. If, at the conclusion of the initial session, settlement cannot be reached, the Court will determine an appropriate track for the case. The matter may be referred to either: (1) the Special Master/ Neutral Evaluator Program; (2) court personnel for mediation; or (3) the assigned Judge or Judge’s staff for settlement conference. Matrimonial Special Evaluation Program Statement of Procedures Order of Reference Matrimonial Special Evaluation Program Matrimonial Mediation Program Statement of Procedures Order of Reference Matrimonial Mediation Program Short Form Order Selection of Neutral Report of Neutral Roster of Matrimonial Mediators Roster of Matrimonial Special Masters Neutral Evaluators Survey (Matrimonial) SUPREME COURT GENERAL CIVIL The initial settlement conference is scheduled before the assigned Judge within approximately 45 days of the preliminary conference. Attorneys with settlement authority are directed to appear at the initial Judicial Settlement Conference. The parties must either appear at the initial conference or be reachable by phone. If, at the conclusion of the initial settlement conference, settlement cannot be reached, the Judge Principal Law Clerk will determine an track for the case within sixty (60) days. The assigned Judge will be kept informed of the progress of the (appearances dates and prospect of settlement) every 45 days. Final resolution, if any, to be noted by the Compliance Conference date. Discovery will not be stayed but will proceed simultaneously alongside the track. At the Certification Conference, an additional settlement conference session will be scheduled to occur within 60 days after the filing of the Note of Issue. Finally, when the case is scheduled in the Trial Assignment Part, settlement discussions will again be conducted. Civil Case Program Rules Order of Reference Civil Case Program Assignment Form Civil Case Program Administrative Order 15-2021 Tenth JD Nassau Civil Case Program Neutrals Administrative Order 20-23 Tenth JD Nassau Civil Case Program Neutrals Civil Case Program Roster Report of Neutral Survey SURROGATE’S COURT Judicial Settlement Conferences are held on all eligible cases at the earliest appropriate stage. Parties may request referral to a neutral evaluator for a free initial session of ninety (90) minutes. If the parties choose to continue beyond the initial session, the Neutral Evaluator may be compensated as agreed upon in writing between the parties and the Neutral Evaluator. Surrogate’s Court matters exempt from shall consist of guardianship adoption; appointment of a Guardian Ad and kinship hearings. FAMILY COURT The Family Court will use at all stages of a proceeding and at each appearance. Settlement Conferences will be held by either the Judge, the Judge’s Court Attorney, the Support Magistrate, or the Court Referee assigned to preside over the matter. In addition to these settlement conferences, the Family Court may schedule the case for further within 45 days with either: (1) a private mediation or through a (2) a dedicated court employee mediator for and child support proceedings; or (3) the assigned Judge, a Court Attorney or Court Referee for a settlement conference. Family Court matters which may be exempt from shall consist of: Persons in Need of Supervision and Juvenile Delinquency proceedings; Abuse cases; Family Offense cases with Violence; and Jailed Pro Se Litigants Information to Prepare for Your Mediation [English] a para DISTRICT COURT All Small Claims cases will be initially calendared for mediation. The parties will be sent to volunteer mediators from the Network, a non-profit dispute resolution organization, present in the Courthouse. Cases that are on for the first time in all Civil Parts will be calendared for settlement conference on the initial Court date by the assigned Judge. Civil Part cases of $6000 or less are referred to Mandatory Arbitration before a Nassau County Bar Association Panel Arbitrator. For Landlord and Tenant cases, cases are placed on an calendar for settlement conference and adjourned every (45) days, until the Judge determines that the case cannot be resolved through LOCATE AN OUTSIDE PROVIDER To assist court users with locating a mediator that might be appropriate for their case, The Statewide Office of has created the Statewide Mediator Directory which lists mediators who are approved to mediate in courts throughout New York State. You may also seek the services of a Community Dispute Resolution Center which offers free and mediation. There is a for every county in New York State. They can mediate court cases, as well as disputes that are not in court. Many offer virtual mediation. If a court refers your case to mediation, consult first with the referring court about your options: in some courts and in some case types, mediation services may be free of charge. More information about and locations of your: Local Community Dispute Resolution Centers RELATED LINKS Attorney Client Fee Dispute Resolution Program 10th JD Nassau Network Long Island Dispute Resolution Center Family Divorce Mediation Council Nassau County Bar Association Panel New York Association of Collaborative Professionals New York State Council on Divorce Mediation Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge Unified Court System Application to Mediate for New York State Trial Courts Unified Court System The Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution Unified Court System Statewide Mediator Directory Upcoming Part 146 Approved Training Programs Events INFORMATION FOR COURT NEUTRALS The District Administrative Judge has complied rosters of mediators or neutral evaluators who are qualified to receive referrals from the court. These rosters are case type specific. In order to be eligible for appointment to the roster, neutrals must meet the minimum qualifications and training criteria set forth in Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge and meet any additional qualifications set forth for each program’s rules. Court approved neutrals receiving referrals from the roster are required to comply with the District’s program rules and fee structures specific to the panel on which they are appointed. Upcoming Part 146 Approved Training Programs and Events Parties may choose an provider from a court roster or from an outside resource. Parties should always inquire about the qualifications and experience of the neutral. Call for Mediators and Neutral Evaluators The 10th Judicial County serves a wide variety of litigants, including persons of varying age, race, ethnicity, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, physical or mental ability, religion, socioeconomic and family status. Neutrals with a wide variety of cultural and life experiences enrich the alternate dispute resolution process by bringing diverse perspectives to resolving disputes. To better serve our District’s population and instill confidence in participants in the alternate dispute resolution process, the 10th JD is committed to attracting and retaining neutrals who represent a range of personal and professional backgrounds. Qualified applicants of diverse backgrounds and experiences are encouraged to apply for admission to the Rosters in the 10th Judicial District. Court Roster Applications To apply please complete the Statewide Application for Court Rosters or the applicable 10th JD application. The Office of Application to Mediate for New York State Trial Courts Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 