Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System 8th JUDICIAL DISTRICT 8th JD Home Accessibility (ADA) Alternative Dispute Resolution Courts by County County County Chautauqua County Erie County County Niagara County Orleans County Wyoming County Town Village Courts General Information Court Structure Court Terms Holidays District Office Get Notified of Job Opportunities Links Programs, Procedures Protocols Judges Rules Supervising Judges Supreme Court Justices Rules Jurors Law Library (Buffalo) Statewide Info Court Help Center Free Legal Assistance Contact Us Public Access to Virtual Appearances Alternative Dispute Resolution for the 8th Judicial District Programs Providers by Type Contacts Goals Foster early, resolution of disputes Allow parties to express interests and feel heard Attract and engage neutrals with diverse personal and professional backgrounds Make interpreters and accessibility services available at Open to attorney participation Run in parallel with court case and not slow litigation outcome Policy It is the policy of the Unified Court System to encourage the resolution of civil legal disputes by methods including mediation, arbitration, neutral evaluation, settlement practices, and summary jury trials. All civil actions or proceedings heard in the Supreme Court, Court of Claims, County Court, Family Court, Surrogate’s Court and City Court shall be eligible for early referral to an alternative dispute resolution process unless otherwise excluded. Courts may refer parties to an process at any time after an action has been commenced and are encouraged to do so at the earliest practicable opportunity. Programs Providers Center for Resolution Justice This local nonprofit partners with the Unified Court System to provide alternatives to litigation. It offers many different services throughout the 8th Judicial District. Many of its services are also available directly to the public (and without court referral). Learn more, Child Welfare Permanency Mediation Program Provides mediation of permanency issues in family court child abuse neglect cases. Court referral required. Program services available after court petition filed. Learn more Children Come First Program Court staff mediate parenting plans and conduct parenting assessments for supreme court cases. Court referral required. Services available after lawsuit filed. Learn more City Court Small Claims Mediation Program The Center for Resolution and Justice mediates small claims cases from Dunkirk, Jamestown, Niagara Falls, North City Courts. Court referral required. Services available after lawsuit filed. Erie County Surrogate's Court Presumptive Program The Erie County Surrogate may refer Surrogate's court cases for mediation by who are listed on its Roster. If no fee is charged by the mediator for the first 120 minutes (but fees may be charged to parties choosing to go beyond 120 minutes). Court referral required. Services available after court petition filed. Family Court Custody and Visitation Program The Center for Resolution and Justice will mediate family court custody and visitation cases. Court referral required. Services available after court petition filed. settlement conferencing Parenting Coordination Program For parenting coordination in high conflict and Family Court cases by Parenting Coordinators who are listed on a Roster. Court referral required. Program services available after filed. Learn more Referral to Roster Courts in the 8th Judicial District may refer cases to mediators listed in the Roster of Mediators. If no fee will be charged by the mediator for the first 120 minutes (but fees may be charged to parties choosing to go beyond 120 minutes). There is also a Statewide Directory of Mediators searchable by location and case type that includes mediators from across New York State and also includes more information about local roster members areas of practice and experience. Anyone may use the Statewide Directory, but only cases get 120 free minutes of mediator time. Restorative Justice Community Dispute Resolution Centers partner with the courts to provide Restorative Justice services in select family and civil supreme cases. Court or probation referral required. Settlement Judges In Supreme Court Civil cases, parties may request that their case be heard by a justice other than the justice assigned to the case, pursuant to Supreme Court Rules 202.29 and 3). In the 8th JD, the following justices have agreed to provide settlement conferencing to cases assigned to other justices, upon the approval of the justice assigned to the case: Hon. Emilio Hon. Paula Hon. Daniel Furlong, Hon. Mark Hon. John Hon. Amy Hon. Henry Hon. Catherine Hon. Donna Hon. Timothy Walker. Summary Jury Trials In Supreme Civil Cases, parties may stipulate to a summary jury trial, which is an abbreviated version of a full jury trial. by Type Child Victim Survivor Act (Supreme Court) In addition to all other options available for Supreme Civil cases, Restorative Justice services are offered. Complex Civil Commercial (Supreme Court) Martin P. Center enhanced settlement case conferencing by court staff OR Case conferencing with clerk assigned to your case OR Mediation or neutral evaluation by listed in Statewide Mediator Directory OR Case conferencing with a justice not assigned to the case OR Summary Jury Trial Divorce (Supreme Court) Children Come First Program mediation of custody visitation parenting plans (and conduct parenting assessments) OR Center for Resolution and Justice mediation of all issues OR Parenting Coordination Program parenting coordination by neutral listed on its roster OR Case conferencing with clerk assigned to your case OR Mediation or neutral evaluation by listed in Statewide Mediator Directory Probate Estate (Surrogate’s Court) Martin P. Center enhanced settlement case conferencing by court staff OR Case conferencing with clerk assigned to your case OR Mediation or neutral evaluation by listed in Statewide Mediator Directory or Erie County Surrogate’s Court Roster of Mediators Custody Visitation (Family Court) Family Court Custody and Visitation Program mediation by Center for Resolution and Justice OR Case conferencing with attorney assigned to your case OR Parenting Coordination Program parenting coordination by neutral listed on its Roster Child Abuse Neglect Permanency Plans (Family Court) Child Welfare Permanency Mediation OR Case conferencing with attorney assigned to your case Small Claims (City Court) City Court Small Claims Mediation Program mediation by Center for Resolution and Justice OR Case conferencing with clerk assigned to your case. Contact Information Administrative Judge of the Eighth Judicial District: Hon. Kevin M. Carter, Coordinator: Audrey Rose Herman, Esq., Court Attorney Referee Regional Coordinator: Bridget M. O’Connell, Court Attorney Referee, 25 Delaware Avenue, Buffalo, NY 14202 Martin P. Center: Melissa Esq., Court Attorney Referee Center for enhanced case conferencing of supreme and surrogate's court cases (but not cases) Children Come First Program: Sarah Lane or Program for mediation of parenting plans parenting assessments in cases Child Welfare Permanency Mediation Program: Suzanne Program Administrator Program for mediation of permanency plans in family court child cases Center for Resolution and Justice: (716) 362-2323 or The is a local nonprofit partnering with the court to provide many services throughout the 8th Judicial District, including the City Court Small Claims Mediation Program Family Court Custody and Visitation Program Erie County Surrogate’s Court Program: Esq. or Joel Moore, Esq. Presumptive Program Roster of Mediators Case conferencing: lawyers should arrange case conferencing with chambers of Judge assigned to your case Statewide Mediator Directory: list of Language access and court interpreters: Learn more Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 