Building Bridges Gala 2023 Building Bridges Gala 2023 Register Now Exact matches only Search in title Search in content 99 Quentin Roosevelt Blvd. Suite 200, Garden City, NY 11530 +1 (516) 539 0150 +1 (516) 539 0160 About 50 Years of Service Our Team Board of Directors Careers Internships FAQ Services Children Youth Services Chance to Advance Court Appointed Special Advocates Project Access Safe Safe Mentoring Safe Start Suffolk County Child Advocacy Center Suffolk County Children’s Center at Court Supervised Visitation Treatment Court Family Community Services Alternatives for Youth ERASE Project Support Home Base Program Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP) Weatherization Referral and Packaging Program (WRAP) Long Island Dispute Resolution Centers Long Island Parenting Institute Nutrition Education Food Services Sanctions Intervention Second Chances in Occupant Protection for Everyone (SCOPE) Teen Driving Equation Program Behavioral Health Criminal Justice Services Abusive Partner Intervention Program Alcohol Education Program Anger Management Program Bronx Community Re-entry Assistance Network Bronx Brooklyn Collaborative Legal Engagement Assistance Response (CLEAR) Brooklyn Community Re-entry Assistance Network Brooklyn Misdemeanor Veterans Treatment Court Brooklyn Behavioral Health Treatment Court Collaborative Brooklyn Community Service Drug Testing Services Nassau County Family Treatment Court Health Home Care Coordination Manhattan Community Re-entry Assistance Network Manhattan Mental Health Court Manhattan Treatment Court Project Mental Health Diversion Nassau New Path Treatment Center Offender Reentry Program Queens Community Re-entry Assistance Network Queens Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitor (SCRAM) Staten Island Community Assistance Network Staten Island Suffolk Drug Court Expansion Project Suffolk Suffolk Alcohol Education Program (STEP) Suffolk Transitional Case Management Suffolk Transitional Case Management Brooklyn Youth Initiative Overdose Prevention Community Engagement Test Strip Distribution Initiative Senior Nutrition Services Community Guardianship Expanded Services for the Elderly Program Fresh from the Garden Senior Center Respite Services Long Beach Senior Center Meals on Wheels North Merrick Senior Center Port Washington Senior Center Senior Health Promotion Surrogate Decision Making Committee Elder Abuse Enhanced Multidisciplinary Team Vocational Services Enhanced Employment Initiative Mission Employment Vocational Services Get Involved Your Streets. Our Streets. Network’s 20.23 Campaign Donate Now Community Media Partners Donate Goods Planned Giving Other Ways to Get Involved Events Upcoming Events News Media News Media More To Do! Blog Media Kit Newsletters Gallery Milestone Magazine Podcast Contact Us Interactive Map Long Island Dispute Resolution Centers Download Program Brochure Peer Mediation Training Brochure Restorative Practice Circles Training Brochure View program highlights Program Overview Long Island Dispute Resolution Centers provide conflict resolution interventions that help individuals, families, businesses, and the community at large to resolve a wide range of disputes. Basic Mediation Training Now Open Read Program Testimonials Clients Served Last Year: 8,636 Program Contact: Judy Senior Director Funding Generously Provided by: Unified Court System, Department of Education, Nassau County Department of Human Services Office of Youth Services, Attorney General’s Office, Dispute Resolution Association, Justice Center for Protection of People with Special Needs, and private donations. Contact Information: Nassau 175 Fulton Avenue New York 11550 (516) 489-7733 Suffolk 60 Plant Avenue New York 11788 (631) 265-0490 About Judy Judy moved to New York from Texas over 16 years ago, when she was first introduced to conflict resolution at Network. She has since devoted her time and passion to providing peaceful alternatives to those in need of conflict resolution services. She has participated in numerous training sessions, including Basic Mediation, Custody and Visitation Mediation, Divorce Mediation, Special Education Mediation, Small Claims Mediation, Agricultural Mediation and Surrogate Decision Making. Judy earned a BA Degree in the field of Criminal Justice from the University of Texas in San Antonio and has previous experience working at the U.S. District Courts and in Southern and Western Districts of Texas. Close Program Description The Problem: Conflict is unavoidable in life and occurs when individuals or groups do not meet their needs or find satisfaction. While conflict is neither necessarily good nor bad, some situations are more difficult to handle than others and require extra mediation for the best possible outcome. Our Solution: Provide peaceful resolution of conflicts to prevent problems from escalating by removing parties from the court setting and inserting into a collaborative setting. Our Mission: The Long Island Dispute Resolution Centers seek to resolve conflicts in Nassau and Suffolk counties by offering dispute resolution services from trained professionals who guide individuals, families, or entities, in a peaceful, neutral and confidential manner to develop mutually acceptable resolutions to a wide variety of disputes. How We Do it: provides conflict resolution services in the form of arbitration, conciliation, mediation, surrogate decision making, and training. Disputes handled at our center include: Family Conflicts: Divorce, Elder Care, and Succession Planning. Special Education Issues: Special Education Mediation Nassau and Suffolk, Early Intervention, and Adult Career and Continuing Education Services. Community Disputes: Neighbor, small claims disputes, lemon law arbitration, agricultural disputes, and workplace disputes. Other services: Peer Mediation Training and Restorative Practice Circles Training, Surrogate Decision Making Training Institute Courtney Esq. Director of Training and Development Training Institute: Basic Mediation Training, Apprenticeship Training, Advanced Mediation Training, Organizational Workplace Training, Peer Mediation Training, Restorative Circles Training, Continuing Education Opportunities for Organizations If you are returning to the office and need some communication and conflict resolution refresher, the Long Island Dispute Resolution Centers have the solution for you. We’re happy to offer two interactive workshops, Communications in the and the at for employees and managers alike. Additionally, we offer customized seminars and training events for organizations. Contact us today at to set up a workshop for your organization and learn practical ways to resolve conflict on the job. Constructive Communications in the Workplace This interactive workshop will examine the science of conflict and offer strategies to improve communication in the workplace and prevent the escalation of conflict. Participants will engage in several activities and exercises to increase their skills, including active listening, and Finding the at Work Are you a collaborative problem solver looking to enhance your skills? During this interactive workshop, participants will review conflict styles and understand how to work together using a collaborative style as a team to find solutions that meet everyone’s needs. Additionally, participants will learn about different processes available to resolve conflict at work. Participants will have the opportunity to practice and build their skills. Continuing Education Opportunities for Mediators Basic Mediation Training Our Basic Mediation Training provides participants with an overview of the skills and knowledge related to the practice of mediation. The course content incorporates foundational principles of conflict resolution, negotiation, and mediation. After completing the Basic Mediation Training, participants are eligible to apply for Long Island Dispute Resolution Mediator Apprenticeship program. Part 146 Approved, Credits pending Advanced Training: Core Values of Mediation Our core values determine our actions in any area of life. What are the pillars of the mediation process, and how do they drive our mediation practice? Relying upon two of the primary ethical codes for mediators, including the Model Standards of Conduct for Mediators and the Standards of Conduct for New York State Community Dispute Resolution Center Mediators, this program provides a deep dive into the core values of mediation: confidentiality, safety, quality, and As we advance our knowledge, we continue to return to the basics therefore, in this to the advanced training, participants apply the core values of mediation through exercises, activities, and scenarios to gain confidence no matter what scenario they encounter while serving as a mediator. Dates to be Announced shortly; credits pending. Mediation Apprenticeship Our Mediation Apprenticeship offers individuals who have completed Basic Mediation Training the opportunity to gain practical experience mediating actual cases and receiving feedback for skill development and growth. Please contact us at for more information about signing up for our apprenticeship program. Training Are you a mediator on a New York State court roster or a mediator at a Our Training complies with the New York State court’s new regulation requiring mediators to complete a Training. Please contact us at to inquire about enrollment. How Mediation Can Help You: Special thanks to students at University for putting together this video! How You Can Help: To support with a gift, click here or call (516) 539-0150 DONATE NOW The Outcomes of Relationships are rebuilt and participants cultivate effective communication skills as they become empowered through creative thinking and innovative solutions. What People Say About When I was told that I could request a mediation to resolve a dispute with my school district about my son’s eligibility for support services, I was quite intrigued. When the district agreed, we went forward with the mediation. We were a little skeptical about how it was going to play out and a little nervous that it wasn’t going to be completely impartial. We ended up more than thrilled with the process and the quality of the mediation. It was impartial, professional, organized, and structured. The mediator was phenomenal with handling a very difficult, complicated, and sensitive case. She was respectful, fair, impartial, knowledgeable, sensitive, assertive, patient, and firm. We were able to come to a mutual agreement which was followed by both parties. We have started fresh with our district and have a new, more positive relationship which we are thrilled about!!! We are so happy to have had the mediation and to have worked with Network and their skilled mediator. We cannot thank them enough! Jennifer Mediation Client I walked into the Dispute Resolution Center nervous. I was greeted warmly by the lady at the front desk. I immediately felt calm. The meeting was on time as scheduled. My former tenant was there as well. My former tenant owed me months of rent and moved out owing me over $10,000. He did not contact me for months and I was unable to contact him. I asked for help from other services, but they stated they could only help the tenant, not the landlord. When I heard of Network, I called and spoke with Nicole and she explained the process of mediation. I did not want to take this dispute to court because I could not afford a lawyer. This mediation was such a blessing to me. Everything was handled in a professional manner. My former tenant is cooperating and paying as we agreed upon in mediation! Pearl Mediation Client owes its success not only to the staff who share the goal of peaceful resolution, but to the volunteers who give their time, dedication, and talents in helping the community resolve their disputes. Through their humanitarian spirits, the community is a safer and brighter place! Judy Program Director We did not want to let too much time go by without thanking you for your vital participation in our 18th Annual Safe and Supportive Schools and Communities Conference. The information you shared, the interest and passion you brought to your topic was appreciated and valued by those who heard you speak. The success of that single day is made (or dashed) with the quality of presentations. Although we’ve only briefly scanned our many evaluation forms at this time, we can confidently say that the caliber of workshop presentations this year was Many respondents wrote they learned a lot from their specific workshops. Thank you so much for your willingness to participate as a presenter in addition to your participation as a Consortium member. Much appreciated! We look forward to continuing our work together. Laura and Keith Gerber Conference of the Safe and Supportive Schools and Communities Consortium, Peer Mediation Clients On behalf of Bishop Lawrence and the entire team at I am writing to thank you for the contribution you made by being present during our Family Summit. We valued your time and appreciated your care so much that we want to inform people about the work of Network and the LI Dispute Resolution Center. We are grateful to have a connection with you and will keep in touch if there are other ways to serve and support your good work. Gregg, THANK YOU. We are grateful for your contribution and for all that you brought into the space to have helped make the day a success. Client I wish I could help the next guy. For what it’s worth, I am going to recommend using this program to my friends and colleagues if they have any issues. This was a very consumer friendly process, and you were always quick with a response and an answer. You and the arbitrator have my thanks. Alex Client Thank you for providing consulting services as well as the necessary training of the John W. peer mediation team. Immediately after the training was complete a teacher made a referral for two students. two girls best friends and, apparently, have had some sort of disagreement. I don’t know any specific details. All along they have worked so well together and always paired up for special projects, Now the one has asked for her seat to be moved because they are longer it is not a big issue and can be resolved The two students agreed to have mediation the next day during their lunch period. The peer mediation team prepared for the upcoming mediation; however the mediation did not occur because the two students choose to resolve their conflict privately. The peer mediation team feels this is a success because the upcoming peer mediation appointment encouraged the students to discuss their problems. We look forward to more success stories. The newly trained mediators plan on starting the 2018-2019 off with an advertising blitz to let their peers learn about this valuable option for conflict resolution. Thank you for support. (View original letter here.) Mrs. John W. Middle School Librarian Peer Medication Coordinator, Peer Mediation Client Life Changing Conflict Resolution Training for Individuals, Organizations, and Communities The Training Institute at Long Island Dispute Resolution Centers is a leader in education and offers a wide range of class offerings to individuals and organizations. By incorporating theory and practice, participants in our interactive training courses and apprenticeship learn about negotiation, mediation, conflict resolution, communication, and interpersonal skill development to resolve conflicts collaboratively and build harmonious community relationships. As a trainer, it is inspiring to bring community members together to collaborate and see the impact of conflict resolution learning and education on training personal and professional growth! Courtney Director, Alternative Dispute Resolution Resolving Conflict without Judicial Intervention Being a volunteer mediator with has been and remains an extremely rewarding experience. Despite being a practicing attorney for nearly 20 years, I wasn’t introduced to community mediation programs until a few years ago; I quickly became aware of the essential value they bring to their local communities. Tremendous gratification can be found helping people resolve their conflict(s) through productive communication, avoiding the need for legal judicial intervention. Jillian Volunteer Mediator Helping people through difficult conversations My biggest satisfaction as a volunteer mediator at Small Claims Court is being able to aid parties in having a difficult conversation about their differences in a informal way, rather than through the legal procedures required by the Court. Talks are messy, emotional and sometimes loud. Sometimes they get resolved and sometimes not, but everyone gets a chance to speak their mind and be heard Michael Volunteer Mediator A possible gentler path to understanding and resolving conflict Volunteering for as a mediator has been a unique and personally satisfying experience. I appreciate that the organization strives to provide mediators with ongoing training and apprenticeships, which elevate the professional level of the service that their mediators provide. mediation program affords mediators, like myself, the opportunity to facilitate a process that empowers clients to participate in understanding their dispute and to work towards achieving a resolution where possible. The mediation process that offers benefits their clients because it allows their voice to be heard, and it allows them the possibility of a resolution to their dispute, which is not always afforded the client in conventional legal settings, mediation program offers their clients a possible gentler path to understanding and resolving their conflict. It offers mediators, like myself, the satisfaction of helping people to deal with their conflict in a neutral, understanding and professional setting. Melinda Volunteer Mediator View other Network Services Children Youth Services Family Community Services Behavioral Health Criminal Justice Services Senior Nutrition Services Vocational Services Special Thanks Donate Now Careers Form 990 Privacy Policy twitter Instagram Google About Network is a diverse social service agency that empowers, assists, and cares for people in need across Long Island and New York City. Our objective is to reach individuals within our community through innovative programs that improve quality of life. Administrative Office Network Network Administrative Office: 99 Quentin Roosevelt Blvd. Suite 200 Garden City, NY 11530 PH: (516) 539-0150 (516) 539-0160 Network 2023. All Rights Reserved. Web Design by Fat Guy Media Close this module Ensure 100% of Your Donation Goes to Network Thank you for supporting Network! Network incurs service and credit card fees in order to process online donations, which lowers the value of your donation. When making an online donation, you guarantee that 100% of the value of your donation goes directly to Network by covering the small cost of fees. Should you prefer not to cover the cost of fees, please call our Development Department at (516) 539-0150 to arrange your donation by phone, or to make your donation by check, please fill out this form and mail it to: Network Attention: Development 99 Quentin Roosevelt Blvd. Suite 200 Garden City, NY 11530 Thank you again for your generous support! Close this module Important Update Dear Colleagues and Friends: Network’s Long Island Dispute Resolution Center provides services while also adhering to critical measures set forth by government officials to ensure our and staff's safety and health. We currently offer services and on a virtual platform, Cisco via telephone conference call. These services are being provided to you at no cost by dedicated, trained neutrals and staff. NASSAU COUNTY General Mediation, Small Claims Mediation, Custody and Visitation Mediation, Conflict Coaching, and other Conflict Resolution Inquiries 516-489-7733 ext. 165 Lemon Law Arbitration and Matrimonial Mediation Inquiries 631-265-0490 ext. 204 SUFFOLK COUNTY General resolution Tenant Mediation, Inquiries 631-265-0490 ext. 203 Custody and Visitation Mediation Inquiries 631-265-0490 ext. 201 Lemon Law Arbitration Inquiries 631-265-0490 ext. 204 Small Claims Inquiries TRAINING for our Basic Mediation Training! Learn more by emailing or visiting our website: For more information about Peer Mediation Training or Restorative Practice, Circles Training, call 516-489-7733 ext. 160. HOW TO BECOME A VOLUNTEER MEDIATOR Long Island Dispute Resolution Center provides training in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, including Basic Mediation, Conflict Resolution, Peer Mediation, Conflict Coaching, Restorative Practice, and Circles. Please learn more here or contact For further inquiries, please click here. Never see this message again. 