Skip to Main Content HOME Page Navigation HOME SEARCH Uncontested Divorce Program es en pulsar en o tribunal An "uncontested" divorce is where both you and the person you want to divorce agree to divorce and there is an agreement about what will happen to your finances and property after the divorce. [Learn more about Divorce] You can use this program if: You and the person you want to divorce are over 18 years of age, You and the person you want to divorce have no "children" under 21 years of age, Your marriage has been over for at least 6 months and your relationship can't be saved, AND All marital property issues, including debt, have been settled. Information Checklist You will need the following information with you when you use this program: The name, previous last names (if any), current address, social security number, and phone number of the person you want to divorce. A copy of your marriage certificate. If you have any of the following: Settlement Agreement, Order of Protection, etc. If you have an extreme financial hardship and can't afford the court fees: information about your income, the things you own, and how much you spend a month on utilities and rent. Download and print the checklist of information you will need to complete this program. Start Uncontested Divorce Program Note: You will be taken to our partner website called Interactive. You can "Sign Up" for an account or go directly to the program without signing up by clicking on the green "Get Started" button. Then check to agree to the Terms of Use and click on "Continue" to begin the program. About Forms Who Can Use These Programs? You can use Forms if: a court user and you have a lawyer; a legal services provider; a pro lawyer. Pro lawyers filing a Form must submit affirmation. from a (reduced fee) program. You must submit a affirmation with the filing. Commercial use is prohibited and no one may charge for using these programs. When you begin the program, you will be asked to accept these terms of use. Computer Requirements In order to use Form programs, make sure you have the following: Attached printer Help Using Forms See Frequently Asked Questions for help using Form programs. Related Information: About Divorce Uncontested Divorce Overview Children in a Divorce Case SEARCH COURT LOCATOR Choose County Albany Bronx Cayuga Chautauqua Clinton Columbia Cortland Delaware Erie Essex Franklin Fulton Greene Hamilton Jefferson Kings Kings (Brooklyn) Lewis Livingston Madison Monroe Montgomery Nassau New York New York (Manhattan Niagara Oneida Onondaga Ontario Orange Orleans Putnam Queens Richmond Richmond (Staten Island) Schenectady Schuyler Seneca St. Lawrence Steuben Suffolk Sullivan Tompkins Ulster Warren Washington Wayne Wyoming Yates Choose Court Type Appellate Divisions Appellate Terms City Court Civil Court NYC Housing) County Court Court of Appeals Court of Claims Criminal Court NYC District Court Family Court Supreme Court Surrogate's Court Town Court Village Court Find the Court Quick Links: Legal Glossary Forms Ask a Law Librarian Topics A to Z Help Centers Find a Lawyer Contact Us Going to Court Getting Help Court Forms Fees Court System Basics Court Case Basics Families Children Adoption Custody Visitation Support Paternity Divorce Forms Safety Violence Domestic Violence Extreme Risk Protection Orders Crime Victims Sex Offender Registry Privacy and Name Change Address Confidentiality Criminal Criminal Case Basics Crime Victims Collateral Consequences Sentencing Getting Rights Back Criminal Records Sealing Problems with Money When You Owe Money When Someone Owes You Money Mandatory Arbitration Small Claims Homes Eviction Evictions Outside NYC Foreclosures Tenant Foreclosures SCAR ARC Name Change Sex Designation Change Name Change Basics Marriage, Divorce, Adoption or Citizenship More About Child Name Changes Privacy and Name Change Forms Correcting a Birth Certificate Proof of Birth Criminal Convictions Sex Designation Change Basics Guardianship Guardianship Case Guardianship of a Child Guardianship of an Incapacitated Person Guardianship of an Intellectually or Developmentally Disabled Adult Appointing a Standby Guardian for a Child Naming a Guardian of a Child as Part of a Will Help Resources for Guardians When Someone Dies Probate Administration Small Estate After the Case is Over Appeals Trial Collecting a Judgment Web page updated: March 16, 2020 Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 