Skip to main content Main Menu Home The Courts Representing Yourself The Law Jurors Judges Legal Profession Topics A to Z SEARCH New York State Unified Court System Divorce Divorce Resources Home Statewide Coordinating Judge for Matrimonial Matters Divorce Resources Alternative Dispute Resolution Divorce Mediation Divorce Forms Instructions Uncontested Divorce Forms Instructions Uncontested Divorce Packet Forms Uncontested Divorce Forms for Contested Cases Uncontested Joint Divorce Pilot Project Divorce in Your County Divorce Info FAQ's Domestic Violence Finding a Lawyer Glossary of Legal Terms Resources for Unrepresented Parent Resources Supreme Court Contact Info Resources for Judges Attorneys Maintenance Child Support Tools Child Support Resources Parentage Proceedings Adult Dependent Support Divorce Forms The New York State Unified Court System offers free instruction booklets and forms for people starting a divorce. Before you use the booklets and forms, we strongly suggest that you give serious thought to using a lawyer for your divorce, even if you believe that your divorce will be your spouse will not oppose the divorce in any way). There can be a lot more to think about than just ending the marriage and filling out court papers. (For example, there may be property to divide between you and your spouse, or you may need an Order of Protection child support and other financial support, among other things.) If you are unsure how to find a lawyer, these resources can help you: Call the New York State Bar Association Lawyer Referral Service (toll free) at 1-800-342-3661; Go to if you cannot afford a lawyer; Visit the court system's website; Contact your local bar association for a referral; If you live in the New York City area, go to the Collaborative Family Law Center to learn if you may be eligible for or free collaborative law services through a pilot program. Ask at any courthouse about lawyer referral services. Please read the instructions below that fit your situation Please read the instructions below that fit your situation BEFORE filling out the forms. Divorce General Info Instructions Forms Official Statewide Forms: For attorneys and litigants Valid throughout New York State Required by Court Rules Form Name PDF DOC PDF Net Worth Statement rev. 6/2016, eff. 8/1/16 Preliminary Conference Order eff. 7/1/22 Warning: Prior to using this form, please contact your local Supreme Court Clerk’s Office to determine if they have additional requirements to be added in an Addendum to the form, if any. Temporary Order of Protection (Supreme Court) Order of Protection (Supreme Court) Firearms Seizure Order Supreme Court) PDF Forms do not work in You can use either the Adobe Acrobat or Reader to fill out the application. To save data entered in your form, you must use the FREE Reader or Phantom (paid Reader* (a free easy to download Reader): First, download and save the application to your local computer. Next, install using these instructions. *You must use Internet Explorer Browser when working with Forms For Privately Paid Law Guardians (in the 1st, 2nd, and 4th Departments Footer menu Copyright Privacy Policy Accessibility Contact Us 