E CO DUTCH CO ALTERNATE DISPUTE N PRO GRAM This Supreme Court Alternative Dispute Resolution Program has been initiated with the goal of a faster and m ore cost efficient m of resolving cases. This is consistent with The Excellence Initiative of our Chief Judge, The Honorable Janet Litigants with or without an attorney will be given the opportunity to m a resolution of their cases at every stage of the litigation including before, during and after discovery Most cases will be m by the Judge the Court Attorney so that there is no additional cost for the individual litigants. Cases appropriate for early intervention mediation Cases appropriate f or early intervention m would be identified first at the prelim conference. All cases w be initially considered appropriate for early Excluded f mediation would be cases that involve domestic violence, cases with an imbalance of power or other such cases, in the court’s discretion or a party request. The Prelim conference: If agreed by the parties and counsel, or where appropriate, at the direction of the court, the Judge should explore settlement at that conference or set an early date f or a settlement conference. Courthouse Coordinators: The courthouse coordinators would be the Principal Court Attorney to each of the 3 Supreme Court Justices and the Surrogate: David (Judge Rosa), Shannon Brady (Judge Christa Harper (Judge and Eric (Judge Hay es). Initially the Court Attorney the Judge would also be the m Subject m rules: 1. Custody and Visitation For custody and visitation cases, or any domestic relations m the judge or court attorney would speak f with the attorney s separately from the parties to ensure that the referral to m is appropriate and that neither party feels coerced, intimidated or that there is an imbalance of power. In assessing the custody and visitation issues the judge would have to f evaluate whether an attorney for the children should be appointed and whether f evaluations m be necessary Despite the goal of swift resolution, the best interests, em and physical safety of the children rem paramount. 2. Contract, tort, personal injury malpractice, com and all other cases: These m shall be evaluated on a case by case basis. W rare exception, the attorney s are in the best position to decide whether some or all discovery is needed prior to mediation. At the Prelim Conference and at any subsequent Com Conference the attorney will evaluate whether the case is ripe f or settlement discussions or ref to m Conferences/ Discovery Protocols Prior to Mediation: If the did not believe the case could be effectively until they conducted discovery I would continue to of fer opportunities f or future settlement conferences including 1. post paper discovery with the court or court attorney 2. post depositions: with the court or court attorney 3. after the com of all discovery with the court or court attorney Mediators: The court, in an appropriate case shall, ref er a m to m The parties m select a m f the Court’s Roster of Mediators or a private Mediator in accordance with the time frame set f in the 9th JD protocols f or Alternatives to Mediation: Should m to f ail, the court shall advise the parties and counsel of options other than a standard trial, such as a sum jury trial or binding arbitration. 