NASSAU COUNTY FAMILY COURT 10TH JUDICIAL DISTRICT ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROGRAM (MEDIATION Important Information to Prepare for Your Upcoming Mediation Benefits and Goals of Mediation To assist parents to reach a mutually agreed upon resolution and avoid or minimize the costs associated with litigation. The primary concern is the of the child(ren). To clarify perceptions, meaning the participants can become clearer about what is important to themselves and each other; developing an understanding of the others point of view. To explore outcomes, enabling the parties to reach a fair resolution that will be in the best interest of their children Litigants are more likely to be s with agreements rather than one that is imposed on them by the Court. Fewer future conflicts for families and a reduced likelihood that they will need court intervention Agreements reached in mediation become enforceable by way of a court order issued by a Judge, Referee or Magistrate. If an agreement is not reached in mediation, the court case continues as scheduled Mediation Etiquette The mediator is not permitted under any circumstances to have ex communication s. This means that there cannot be any communication, either in person or electronically email) with either party outside of the mediation session. If you have any questions concerning your case, you are encouraged to contact your attorney if you are being represent ed, or contact the Court if you are In order to ensure that the virtual mediation sessions are productive, please be sure to review the expectations below and do your very best to adhere to them. Only the petitioner and respondent to the case are to be present during the mediation session. If the attorneys are attending, the court will notify the mediation department. Please log into the Microsoft Teams link at the scheduled time. While we acknowledge and appreciate that home is different, please do your best to try to find a quiet place that is free from distractions. Only the parties shall be in the room. Please be courteous and respect others right to speak. Do not interrupt. Do not disparage the other party, as the goal of mediation is to resolve issues. Please be mindful that the mediator may have more than one session scheduled for the day. If the mediator gives a directive to refocus, please be respectful as these meetings are time sensitive and another session maybe scheduled after yours. The privacy and confidentiality of all participants is important. Taking photos, screen shots, is strictly prohibited during the session. The mediator is not permitted to share any documents wit h the parties. The parties may take notes for their own use and recollection but such notes shall be confidential and immune from disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding. 