COUNTY FAMILY COURT RULES OF THE ALTERNATIVE DI RESOLUTION PROGRAM of the Court Program The County Family Court Alternative Dispute Resolution Program offers parties access to qualified mediators in an effort to resolve disputes without litigation. will be referred to a Mediator upon filing of the petition with the Family Court with either a Mediator from the Conflict Dispute Resolution Center or from a Roster of Neutrals. W here the case is referred to the the initial mediation session will be scheduled concomitant with the initial appearance date before the J Court Attorney Referee, or Support Mag the parties will appear before the Court and then immediately go into the initial mediation session in a conference room in the courthouse. W here the case is referred to a Roster Neutral, the parties will be ex to initiate the mediation process in advance of their initial appearance date before the Court. The rules set forth below apply to the County Family Court and will operate concurrently with the Rules of the Program for the Ninth J District, which will define and outline the operation of the Program. Ty Referred for Presumptive Mediation PHASE ONE (com September 1, 2019 and continuing until F 28, 2020): Case types in Phase One to be referred to Mediation include: Initial Custody /Visitation cases, with no prior court Up to four (4) cases p er week will b e referred to med with the Up to four (4) cases p er week will b e referred to med with a Roster Neutral. PHASE TWO (com March 1, 2020 and continuing until August 31, 2020): Case types in Phase Two to be referred to Mediation include: Initial Custody /Visitation cases, with no prior court and Initial Custody cases with prior case history in either Supreme or Family Court; and 1 Cases that will not be appropriate f or mediation are those where o one party is rep resented by counsel, o r in cases co allegations of domestic v ch abuse or neglect, o r another articulated severe p imbalance. T he Court will screen for these at the time of the filing of the pleadings, and then again at the initial to insure that only appropriate cases are b referred to mediation. 1 of custody /visitation order cases with prior history in either Supreme or F Court. Up to six 6) cases p er week will b e referred to med with the Up to ten (10) cases p er week will b e referred to med with a Roster Neutral. PHASE THREE (com September 1, 2020): Cases types in Phase Three to be referred to Mediation include: Initial Custody /Visitation cases, with no prior court and Initial Custody cases with prior case history in either Supreme or Family Court; and of custody /visitation order cases with prior history in either Supreme or F Court; and Child Support proceeding s; and Relocation cases. Up to eight (8) cases p er week will b e referred to mediation with the Up to fifteen (15) cases p er week will b e referred to med with a Roster Neutral. Presumptive Referrals for Mediation Work The assigned Judge or Court Attorney -Referee, or the Support Mag shall refer parties to the Program where certain criteria are met; however, nothing limits parties, on their own, to request referral to the Program for Mediation. Family Courts have unique needs compared to other civil courts in that F Court litigants often appear in Court and in most case types before the F Court, litigants are entitled to the assignment of counsel if they meet certain income Many litigants who do not meet the threshold financial criteria for assigned counsel choose to remain pro se,as opposed to hiring attorney s. Thus, unlike in most other civil proceeding s in a county -level court, many parties do not have counsel advising them or representing their interests in the litigation. As such, referrals to mediation must be made in different way s, depending on whether the parties are represented by assigned counsel, or represented by privately retained counsel. According the case will be referred to one or two tracks: the track or the Roster of Neutrals track. Track Where neither party is represented by counsel or both parties are represented by assigned counsel, and where Chambers has identified this case as qualify for presumptive mediation, the Court will send out two documents to the s: (1) a Notice to Appear before the 2 Assigned J and (2) an Order of Reference directing the s to engage in a mediation with CL and directing the parties to contact CL immediately to perform a telephonic intake with the The parties will perform the intake in advance of the scheduled date. The s will appear in Court on a date certain before the J Attorney Mag for the initial appearance. At the conclusion of that appearance, the parties will be g another court date and sent down the hall to a conference room in the County F Court to engage in a free 60-90 minute session with a mediator from CL If the parties are able to resolve all issues with the mediator, the J Referee will attempt to recall the case that day to place the settlement on the record so the matter will be disposed. I f the parties are unable to settle the matter at the conclusion of the first, free mediation session, they will have the option of: another mediation session with CL in accordance with fee schedule which will take place at the CL offices, or any other location to which all the parties and mediator agree; however, no adjournment of any future court dates or stay of the proceeding s, including any ed ex change of discovery will be g ranted for the parties to continue mediation; or mediation and appearing before the Court on the next scheduled court date. Track Where both parties are represented by retained counsel, the Court will send out two documents to the attorney s and parties: (1) a Notice to Appear before the Ass J Attorney Mag and (2) an Order of Reference directing the s to engage in a mediation with a Neutral from the Roster of Neutrals, which the County Family Court and the Administrative J for the Ninth J District shall establish and In order to be eligible to serve as a and be listed on the Roster, a person shall possess the following qualifications and such others as may hereafter be promulgated. A Neutral shall have (a) have completed at least the amount and type of training required by Part 1461 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator; (b) have recent ex mediating cases in the 1 Part 146 requires prospective mediators to have successfully completed a minimum of forty (40) hours of training in an or training program, which includes 24 hours of training in basic mediation skills and techniques and 16 hours of training in the specific mediation techniques pertaining to the particular field of expertise (see Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator). 3 particular field of ex as mandated by Part 146; (c) comply with the Standards of Conduct for Mediators as set forth in the 9th JD District W Rules Applicable to all Mediation and hereinafter promulgated; and (d) attend at least six hours of additional approved training relevant to their respective practice areas every two y ears. Neutrals may be removed from the Roster at the discretion of district Administrative J The Order of Reference shall direct parties to attend an initial, free, session with a Neutral from the Program’s Roster of Neutrals. I f parties wish to continue bey the initial ninety (90) minute session, they may continue that session or schedule additional sessions; however Neutrals shall be entitled to compensation bey the initial session in accordance with the Program rules of the Ninth J District. The Order of Reference shall also contain an appearance date within thirty (30) day s as set by the referring Judge, Court- Attorney Referee, or the Support Mag The proceeding s on all petitions, including orders authorizing exchange of discovery will not be stayed pending additional sessions. At the initial appearance before the Court, the J Court Attorney -Referee or Support Magistrate shall inquire as whether the parties have already initiated mediation pursuant to the Order of Reference, and shall ascertain whether there has been compliance with the Order of Reference. A future court appearance will be scheduled for the parties to appear in the event that the matter does not resolve via mediation with a fully -executed stipulation or if the parties wish to place the terms of a settlement on the Court’s record. B again, the proceeding s on all petitions, including orders authorizing exchange of discovery will not be stayed pending additional sessions. ROLE OF ATTORNEYS F OR THE CHI I N IN MEDIATION Not every case referred to mediation will have an Attorney for the Child(ren) assigned to represent the children. Also, Attorney s for Child(ren) are assigned at various stages of a pending case. For cases referred to mediation through the if an Attorney for the Child(ren) is present at the initial appearance, that Attorney presence will be required at the first free courthouse mediation session with CL unless the Attorney and the parties agree on the record before the Court that the Attorney appearance at that initial session is waived. For those cases referred to mediation with a Roster Neutral in which an Attorney for the Child(ren) had been appointed prior to the issuance of the Order of Reference, the initial session may not be held without that Attorney presence, unless the parties and the Attorney for the Child(ren) agree otherwise in writing If an Attorney for the Child(ren) is appointed after the initial session, then any future sessions scheduled by the parties must be on notice to the Attorney for the Child(ren) who shall attend the session(s) unless all parties, including the 4 Attorney for the Child(ren), agree in writing that the Attorney for the Child(ren)’s presence may be waived. ram Coordinator(s) The Program shall be supervised and coordinated by the Court Attorney for the Family Court J assigned to that case, or shall be supervised by the Chief Clerks of the F Court for the Support Mag assigned to the child support case. Each of those individuals shall act as the Administrator for the implementation of for each referred case. 5 