7th Judicial District Program Statement of Policy Mediator Pane l It is the policy of the Unified Court System to encourage the resolution of civil legal disputes by methods including mediation, arbitration, neutral evaluation, in -court settlement practices and summary jury trials. All civil actions or proceedings heard in the Supreme Court, Family Court, Surrogate Court and City Court of the 7th JD shall be eligible for early referral to an Alternative Dispute Resolution process unless otherwise excluded. Courts may refer parties to an process a t any time after an action has been commenced and are encouraged to do so at the earliest appropriate time. Call for Mediators and Neutral Evaluators The 7th Judicial District serves a wide variety of litigants, including persons of varying age, race, ethnicity, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, physical or mental ability, religion, socioeconomic and family status. The District’s multiple Mediation Programs recognize that neutrals with a wide variety of cultural and life experiences enrich the process by bringing diverse perspectives to resolving disputes. To accomplish these goals, it is important that the 7th JD Mediation Program Panel attract and retain neutrals who represent a range of personal and professional backgrounds who can, there by, better serve and instill confidence in participants in the process. To that end, qualified applicants of all diverse backgrounds and experiences are encouraged to apply for admission to the Mediation Panels in the 7th Judicial District. Mediator R The Administrative Judge shall establish, and the Program Coordinator shall maintain, a panel of trained mediators Panel for the Program which shall be available on the Court website. To be eligible to join the Panel as a Mediator, a p shall satisfy the training and experience requirements of 22 146.1 seq. (Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge as follows: All Court Panel Mediators shall have received at least 24 hours of basic mediation training, 16 hours of additional training in the specific mediation techniques applicable to specif subject areas of the types of cases referred to them. In addition, all Court Panel Mediators shall have recent experience mediating actual cases in the subject area of the types of cases to be referred to them. Mediation experience can be achieved by mediating at least three Court cases in New York State, or b. Completing a Court Mediation Apprenticeship. A Court Mediation Apprenticeship shall include observing at least one (1) mediation, regardless of case type; (2) three Court cases in the subject area of the types of c to be referred to them and debriefing all observations and with a Court Panel M or Program Contact (3) and evaluation by a Court Panel Mediator a 7th JD Court Mediator or the 7th Coordinator. All Court Panel Mediators must attend six hours of approved Continuing Education relevant to mediating in their respective practice areas every two ye Fulfillment of these requirements does not guarantee acceptance onto the Panel Final placement on a Panel or continuation on a Panel is in the discretion of the District Administrative Judge under Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator. Apply now: 