What is m In mediation, a person called a helps people in a dispute to communicate with one another, to understand each other, and if possible, to reach agreements that satisfy every one’s interests. The mediator does not take sides or decide who was rig ht or wrong in the past. The mediators helps people to make their own decisions and focus on the future. What are the benefits of mediation? Mediation often improves communication, saves time and money reduces stress, improves relationships, and leads to long agreements. Can I bring m y attorney? Attorney s are strong encouraged to prepare clients for mediation sessions, attend mediation sessions, and assist with drafting agreements. You do not need to agree to any thing in mediation without first speaking with an attorney How much w ill m cost? That depends on the issues and on y and the other party Mediators on the court roster have agreed to provide the first 90 minutes of mediation free of charge. Some mediation providers may offer additional, free mediation services to qualify couples, others may offer a sliding fee scale. Community Dispute Resolution Centers charge a nominal (small) administrative fee. Will the m speak w the judge? No. Mediation is confidential, with the ex of cases involving child abuse or threat of imminent harm. The judge may ask if y were screened for mediation, to make sure y have had the opportunity if y both want it, and if it is appropriate in y our case-- to try to resolve 1 If you don’t have an attorney, and you qualify for one, the court may assign you an attorney. Yo u do not need to agree to anything in mediation without first speaking with an attorney. your dispute out of court. The judge or referee may also ask if y are interested in try mediation again at a later stag e in the litigation process. Do I have to go to m No. Mediation is voluntary If you do not want to participate, complete the Mediation Form. I f you do decide to participate in mediation, y may stop at any time. Should I try m Mediation helps many people but does not work for every one. Mediation may not be appropriate or safe in cases involving a history or fear of domestic violence. Mediation may be inappropriate if a party has a significant advantage in power or control over the other. What if I am afraid or I f eel safe? In mediation, it is important that y feel safe so that y can talk openly with the other person about y our dispute. I f you have been hurt or threatened by the other party it may be hard for you to feel safe enough to neg or disagree. I n some cases, mediation may not be a safe choice. How do I decide if it is safe or appropriate f or m e to participate in m You are the best judge of y our own situation. Has the other person ever: hurt y Insulted or talked down to y y or friends, loved ones, or pets with harm? ed your property or discouraged you from seeing friends or family members? who y see, where y go, or what y do? y with g knives, or other weapons? access to money to control y our behavior? If you answered y es to any of these questions, mediation may not be appropriate for y If you or someone y know is in this situation and needs help, visit .gov. How do I learn m ore about m For more information about mediation, see or contact y our County Program Coordinator 