Queens County Sup Court Com Division Alter native Dispute Resolution Pr Mediator The Commercial Division’s Alternative Dispute Resolution Program offers mediation in cases referred by Justices of the court or in cases submitted by parties on consent. Those who wish to become mediators must (i) have successfully completed a minimum of 40 hours of mediation training in an d or training program and (ii) have recent mediation experience and (iii) commercial law experience or equivalent subject matter expertise deemed appropriate by the Administrative Judge. Training in arbitration does not suffice For other prerequisites, please review Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative J on Guidelines for Qualifications and Training of Neutrals Serving on Court Rosters, located at Mediators who join the R mus t be will to mediate the first three (3) hours of a session on a pro basis. Subsequent mediation may be arranged on a private basis subject to Program Rules. Each applicant is requested to provide the information called for below along with a curriculum vitae or r 1. BASIC INFORMATION: Please provide name, firm or organization name and address, phone and f ax numbers and email address. 2. ADMISSIONS: Please list the y ear of your admission to the New York Bar and the names of any other jurisdictions or courts where you are admitted to practice and the year of admission. 3. EDUCATION: Please list any graduate, and legal or other degrees, educational institutions from which degrees were earned, and the year you obtained the degree(s). Updated May 2 0151 4. PROF BACK GROUND AND EXP Please summarize your professional background and experience With respect to the firm or organization for which you currently work and those for which you previously worked, please list your position, the years of employment there and a summary of the type of work performed, including areas of specialization. 5. PUBLICATIONS /PRESENT Please list relevant publications that you authored or relevant presentations that y have g 6. MEDIATION EXP Please list all training programs in mediation for prospective mediators that you have attended, including a description of the program basic mediation training commercial mediation training), the number of hours of each course and the entity that presented the program. Please state whether you have been certified as a mediator and provide details. If you are currently serving as a mediator, please identify the court or organization where you serve Please provide a reasonable estimate of the number of for which you have serve d as mediator a the number of in which y have r a party 7. OTHER R T RAINING OR EXPERIENCE Please describe any other training or experience you believe e y to serve a s a mediator in c l matters. Thank y very much for ta king the time to complete this form and for your interest in our Program. Please complete and send this form to Program Administrator Mari a Bradley Esq., at court or by fax at 718-298-1099, or by mail, 88-11 Boulevard, 5th FL, Jamaica New Y 11435. 