November Long Road h Study of Children Stranded in New York City Foster Care 9: in family court 172 L y court the c untenable caseload has been repeat- documented by various entities, including the court itself for almost a decade, yet the number of judges has not been increased since 1991. As of May 2009, the 26 judges in the Family Court Child Protective Specialty had an average caseload of 724 children and the 19.2 referees had an average caseload of 772 children. Eleven judges and seven referees had more than 800 children on their case loads and three judges and one referee had more than 1000 children on their caseloads. the length of time between children’s entry into foster care and the c completion of f and disposition was extremely long for many children. The mean length of time from remand to disposition was 14 months; the median was 11 months. more than half of children experienced delayed Permanency hearings. percent of children had one or more Permanency Hearings that were not completed within 30 days as required (during a two year period). Almost half (48%) of the delayed hearings were not completed timely because the Permanency Hearing Reports were not submitted timely by the foster care agencies, 20% because the Permanency Hearing Report did not sufficiently ad dress the issues, 26% due to insufficient court time, and 24% because the provider agency caseworker was not present. findings were made at ally all P hearings, calling into question the threshold used to make these determinations. termination of parental rights proceedings were extremely delayed for most children. 6 69% of children in the sample (who were not already legally free) did not have petitions filed on their behalf. In many cases, the men ted not to file did not appear to meet the letter or spirit of policy guidance, and, in some cases, no reason was documented. 6 The mean and median lengths of time from entry into foster care to filing the petition regard at least one parent were 3.2 and 2.5 years, respectively. 6 New York State regulations require that action be taken to legally free children within 30 days of the establishment of an Adoption goal. However, 59% of children did not have a filed against either parent within 30 days. 6 The mean length of time from establishment of the Adoption goal to becoming legally free for adoption was 2.4 years; the median was 2.1 years. New York State regulations require that en be freed within 12 months after the establishment of the permanency planning goal of however, 77% of children were not legally free within that period of time. 6 The mean and median lengths of time from filing the first petition to the date the child became legally free were 2.4 and 1.9 years, respectively. In addition, for more than a third of children who were legally free (34%), this process took more than two years to complete. 6 The mean length of time from the date children entered foster care until they became legally free was 5.4 years; the median was 4.8 years. 6 Given that many children in the study sample en- t foster care a number of years ago, analyses were conducted to determine if the timeliness of processes has changed over time. Although many of the more recent cases still had long delays in filing petitions and completing proceedings, there has been some improvement over time. Stakeholders who participated in interviews and fo-cus groups expressed concerns about the following: 6 The negative impact of large judge and referee caseloads on permanency outcomes for children. 6 The Court’s failure to impose sanctions when its orders are not followed by and the foster care agencies. 6 The Court giving parents repeated opportunities over long periods of time to participate in services. 6 Poor quality casework, including the lack of assessments of progress, which can hamper the Court’s ability to make timely decisions. 6 The failure of the parties to take aggressive legal action to seek relief from the Court and try to move cases through the system more legal in Y T L y court 173 9: legal in f Y T The Family Court plays an extremely important role in the permanency process for children in foster care. Based on the information that the parties in child cases should provide, judges and refer-ees must make critical decisions throughout a child and family’s experience in the child welfare system, including determining the need for the child’s removal from home; determining whether or not the parent(s) abused or neglected the child; regularly reviewing the status of children in foster care; order-ing the services that are needed to address the concerns that brought and are keeping the child in foster care; and ensuring that each child achieves permanency either by safely returning home or through another means such as adoption or legal guardianship. In New Y City each of the five counties has a separate Family Court, which is responsible for over- seeing the cases of children in foster care, as well as many other types of cases, including custody and visitation, juvenile delinquency and domestic violence cases. 174 In December 2005, in an effort to improve permanency outcomes for children in foster care, the was enacted in New Y State. These new and revised laws include the requirement that two Permanency Hearings be held per year for each child in foster care (previously only one hearing per year was held). The first Permanency Hearing must be held eight months after the court determines that the child must be removed from home and placed in foster care, and subse-quent Permanency Hearings must be held every six months. The purpose of Permanency Hearings is to monitor a child’s safety and the family’s progress, and the efforts being made to either safely return the child home or find another permanent home for the child. The Court may also ap-prove a child’s discharge from foster care during a Permanency Hearing. In addition, the new law gives the Court continuing jurisdiction over children’s cases until they are concluded. However, the law was passed with no additional resources and these additional hearings have been added to already over-crowded Family Court calendars. This chapter provides the study findings pertaining to the operations and processes of the Family Court. Data were collected in this study regarding key Family Court processes for children in the study sample and their parents. Information about court issues was also gathered from interviews and focus groups conducted with parents, foster parents, attorneys (for children, parents, and the Administration for Children’s Services and judges and referees. Section I provides a general overview of challenges in the legal proceedings in Family Court pertaining to children in foster care. Section II presents the study findings regarding factors that affect the quality of legal and Family Court practice, including caseloads and other resource and support issues for judges, referees, and the attor-neys who represent children, parents, and in the Family Court. Section III presents the study findings regarding the type of legal authority for children’s placement in foster care, the timeliness of the and Disposition processes, and court review of voluntary placements. t his report concerns only child protection and foster matters. 174 L y court Section IV provides the study findings regarding Permanency Hearings, including court determina-tions regarding whether or not reasonable efforts to achieve permanency have been made, timeliness of Permanency Hearings, and reasons these hearings were not completed timely Section V provides the study findings regarding the timeliness of termination of parental rights processes and other related issues. 175 Section VI provides the study findings regarding cases referred for mediation. i. OF In 2000, the Special Child W Advisory Panel, established as part of the Marisol v. Giuliani class- action lawsuit settlement, reported that New Y City Family Courts were by crowded dockets, long adjournments and not enough attorneys to represent parents and children. With rare exceptions, hearings lack sufficient docket time for a true examination of the issues. A family that becomes the subject of an abuse or neglect proceeding in these courts can expect to return to court repeatedly and to remain involved in litigation for many months, and sometimes for 176 In 2002, the Citizens Committee for Children released a report that found that the shortage of re-sources for the Family Court and attorneys representing all of the parties was preventing compliance with the timelines required by the federal Adoption and Safe Families Act and leading to delays in achieving permanency for children in foster care. 177 In 2005, the Council of Family and Child Caring Agencies released the results of a study it conducted of caseworker time spent in court. 178 Data were collected from seven foster care agencies regarding the time caseworkers spent in court pertaining to 610 Family Court visits. W spent ap-proximately 1700 hours in Family Court for these 610 visits; only 300 of these hours (17.6%) were spent in actual hearings. W waited an average of 2.3 hours for hearings. In 16% of cases, workers waited more than four hours; in 13% of cases, workers waited for more than six hours. Almost 28% of cases were adjourned or rescheduled. The average hearing lasted 32 minutes. In 2007, the Honorable Judith Kaye’s State of the Judiciary report said that the Family Court is short of judicial and called upon the legislature to add 39 more Family Court judges statewide. 179 Also in 2007, the New Y City Bar Association’s Council on Children issued a report calling the Permanency Law an unfunded mandate whose goals cannot be reached without additional resources. 180 In that same year, Children’s Rights issued a report that identified the same problems in the Family it should be noted that this study did not collect data regarding finalizing adoptions. t he purpose of this study was to examine possible barriers to permanency for children who are still in foster care. further, once a child is adopted, the case record is sealed. Special child Welfare a Panel. (2000). Advisory Report on Front Line and Supervisory Practice. Ne w Special child Welfare a Panel, p. 44. c for children. (2002). The Adoption and Safe Families Act and the Family Court. Ne w committee for children. council of f and child caring a (2005). Time at Family Court. Ne w Kaye, J. (2008). The State of the Judiciary 2008, A Court System for the 21st Century. New y State unified c System. 0 New y city bar association’s c on children. (2007). The Permanency Law of 2005: An Unfunded Resource Needs for New York City’s Children and Families. Ne w New y city bar association’s c on children. children’s rights. (2007). At the Crossroads: Better Infrastructure, Too Few Decade of Child Welfare Reform in New York L y court 175 |In the fall of 2008, planning began for a new court improvement effort known as the New Y City Child Protective Initiative. According to the New Y City Family Court, the initiative began to roll out various pieces in July 2009. The initiative is now overseen by the newly appointed Administrative Judge of the New Y City Family Court, the Honorable Edwina The initia-tive’s stated goals are: permanency for children 6 Faster time to disposition 6 completed well before permanency hearing 6 Faster resolution of termination of parental rights proceedings Every appearance meaningful Fewer and shorter adjournments Everyone appearing on time, prepared to go forward Continuous trials Expanded participation of children and youth in permanency Some stakeholders who participated in interviews or focus groups for this study acknowledged that some incremental improvements have been made in the Family Court in recent years. In addition, some advocates have said that the recent in judicial assignments announced during the sum-mer of 2009 by Judge was a positive sign of changes to come. However, in the meantime, the quantitative data regarding the timeliness of key court processes and voluminous stakeholder feedback collected for this study yielded the same concerning findings as have been previously identified, including congested court calendars, long waits outside courtrooms before cases are called, and frequent and long adjournments. Virtually all stakeholders indicated that Family Court caseloads are the major factor underlying many of the identified problems in Family Court. (Resource issues are described in Section II of this chapter.) Judges and referees themselves are extremely concerned about their caseloads, related court delays, and their effect on children’s and lives. As one judge put it, said sorry, I can’t hear your case which I have to tell you, is the worst part of my job. I feel nauseous every time I have to tell [parents] However, in addition to resource issues, many foster parents, attorneys, and judges and referees that the Court does not consistently use its full power to hold the parties in child welfare cases accountable for timely permanency outcomes for children and families. Children remain in foster care for years and the Court gives and the foster care agencies repeated chances, and multiple hearing adjournments, to present evidence provide necessary services to parents, even after they have been negligent in doing so. Stakeholders said that when the Court does issue orders, they often lack specificity instead of ordering that X service must be pro-vided by Y date, the order does not specify a date, which makes the order harder to enforce. Finally by most accounts, the Court does not frequently or consistently use its power to impose sanctions when the foster care agencies have not complied with its orders. City. New y children’s rights. a at New York City Child Protective Proceedings: Shared Action Goals and Steps (undated). Provided to children’s rights by the New city f c a 2009. 176 L y court Indeed, as described in detail in Section IV of this chapter, the Court virtually always makes able findings, meaning that and the foster care agencies have made reasonable efforts to achieve permanency for children in foster care. Reasonable efforts findings are required in order to receive federal funding for individual children in foster care. reasonable findings were made in only 1% of the hundreds of permanency hearings held for children in this study sample. This belies the long lengths of stay in foster care that these children and families were experiencing, as well as other data collected in this study regarding the varying intensity of service provision and the infre-quency of caseworker contacts with children, parents, and resource parents. Stakeholders also said that the Court gives parents repeated opportunities to participate in services toward the goal of family reunification, even after years of inconsistent involvement in services and visits with their children. This practice may be reflected in the long lengths of time many children spend with Return to Parent goals. As described in Chapter 1: Demographics, Case Opening, and Current Case Status, almost of children in the study sample (who were not already legally free for adoption) had mothers and 37% of children had fathers whose whereabouts were unknown for part or all of the review period. A common documented barrier to caseworker contacts with parents and visits with their children was parents missing or canceling scheduled appointments or their whereabouts being unknown. At the same time, stakeholders acknowledge that the Court’s decision making can be hampered by poor quality casework by and the foster care agencies. The Court depends on and the foster care agencies to provide appropriate services to children and families and to make assessments about progress toward permanency in order to inform the Court’s decision making. Judges and referees who participated in a focus group for this study expressed frustration with the quality of case practice and the fact that many caseworkers seem to see their role as only documenting attendance at ser-vices rather than providing their clinical assessment of progress to the Court, so that informed decisions can be made about permanency As one judge and one Family Court Legal Services at-torney said, supposed to be a court and we take evidence and we hear witnesses and we’re supposed to rule. we were just doing might actually do what we’re supposed to be doing. The problem is that we’re in the position of having to be social workers as well. So that takes time and energy and attention to a we shouldn’t be giving to o do both, it’s just impossible and it takes up so much, that’s what takes up my Family Court Judge competency of the workers and oversight by their supervisors is often problematic and causes delays. Because of the poor supervisory oversight, the courts are monitoring more closely. There is a lack of trust by the courts that agencies are following up appropriately on Attorney Thus, judges and referees may sometimes be maintaining Return to Parent goals for long periods of time due to their assessments that casework services provided to parents have been inadequate (although, as noted above, judges and referees rarely make reasonable findings). In addition, judges and referees said that the parties infrequently make applications or motions to the Court for relief to address pressing issues. Finally some stakeholders expressed frustration that, short of the judicial reappointment process (which happens only every ten years) and processes for serious ethics violations, there is no viable com-plaint process for litigants when they have concerns about or conduct, for example, not spending enough time on the bench, failing to hold mandated hearings, and treating litigants poorly L y court 177 |ii. t the OF F Y This section provides the study findings, and data where available, regarding caseloads and other resource issues for judges and referees and the attorneys who represent parties in foster care cases in Family Court. A. S The caseloads of judges and referees in Family Court are a key factor in the Court’s ability to carry out its obligations and move cases to permanency in a timely way Family Court has been overburdened for many years. Since 1991, 47 judges have been assigned to New Y City Family Court. Despite long-standing caseload concerns, the statutory doubling of the number of Permanency Hearings that went into effect in 2005, and a considerable increase in the number of abuse and neglect and voluntary place-ment petitions filed since 2006, the number of judges assigned to Family Court has not been increased. Additionally only 26 of the 47 judges are assigned to the Child Protective Specialty of the New Y City Family Court. As of May 2009, the 26 judges in the Child Protective Specialty had an average caseload of 724 children and the 19.2 referees had an average caseload of 772 children. As shown in Figure 9.1, eleven judges and seven referees had more than 800 children on their caseloads and three judges and one referee had more than 1000 children on their caseloads. 183 As noted above, many of the judges, referees, caseworkers, and attorneys who participated in focus groups and interviews for this study reported that the judges and referees have far too many cases, which leads to frequent and lengthy adjournments and contributes to delayed permanency for many children and families. data provided to children’s rights by the New y city f c July 2, Y ..f ample homemaker f 178 L y court Increasing the number of judges requires action by the State Legislature. Indeed, there has been intense, although unsuccessful, advocacy during the last few years for more judges. Bills have been introduced and many groups, including the court system itself, continue to advocate for increasing the number of Family Court judges both in New Y City and across the state. Figure 9.1: Judge and Referee Caseloads as of May 19, 2009, by Number of Children 184 For a snapshot of the child protective caseload trends in New Y City Family Court, Figure 9.2 provides the number of Article 10 (abuse and neglect petitions) and V Placement petitions filed from FY 1999 through FY 2008. Figure 9.2: Number of Children with Article 10 or V Petitions Filed, by Fiscal Y ear 185 data provided to children’s rights by the New y city f c July 2, 2009. Ne w y city a for children’s Services. June 2000 Update (2000). Ne w office of management and research, p. 3 (data for s 1999 and 2000). Update Annual Report 2005, Five Year Trend (200 7), p. 2 (data for s 2001 2006). Update June 2008 (2008), p 3 (data for s 2007 and 2008). each petition represents a single 46 4.58 6 3 1 Judges (n 26) Referees (n 19.2)012345678 More than 1000 800 999 600 799 401 599 400 or of Number of Children on of Children Fiscal FY 2008 FY 2007 FY 2006 FY 2005 FY 2004 FY 2003 FY 2002 FY 2001 FY 2000 FY 199912,99112,70011,77711,068 8,806 7,246 5,5029,23412,698 11,353 L y court 179 |B. OF the P F Y The following sections provide the study findings regarding resource issues pertaining to Family Court Legal Services attorneys, Attorneys, and 1. Family Court Legal Services noted above, represents and, by extension, the foster care provider agencies, on cases involving abuse and neglect allegations, voluntary placements, and Permanency Hearings. Children’s Rights interviewed attorneys who were representing in a of the cases included in this study 187 a. Attorney Caseloads and T to the average caseload for attorneys is 70 families. 188 The average caseload for the staff attorneys interviewed for this study was 82 families and the median was most data and other information in this section come from interviews that were conducted with attorneys and attorneys and a focus group that was conducted with attorneys. c individual pieces of information that were collected from inter vie wees were not collected from focus group participants. t the sections do not provide exactly the same information. interviewees included 17 staff attorneys and eight attorneys who were supervisors (but were representing in cases involving children in the study sample). t attorneys were each interviewed twice because, by chance, they were assigned to the cases of two children whose cases were selected for interviews. in the analyses of attorney caseload, experience, training, supervision, and access to resources, these responses were included only once (see appendix a: methodology for details). data provided to children’s rights by the a for children’s Services, June 18, OF the F Y T ins ha ship 180 L y court 80 It should be noted that average caseload statistics can mask the full extent of high casel-oads. Indeed, five out of 17 (almost 30%) of the staff attorneys interviewed reported having 100 or more families on their caseload. The American Bar Association’s Standards Drafting Committee recommends a caseload of no more than 60 families for attorneys representing public child welfare Attorney turnover can lead to gaps in knowledge and court delays as newly assigned attorneys must take time to familiarize themselves with cases, interview clients and witnesses, and speak with professionals and family members. reported a 21% turnover rate for attorneys in FY 2008. 191 b. Experience and percent of the attorneys interviewed for this study had been an attorney for two years or less. T percent had more than 10 years of experience. The range of experience was six months to 23 years. 192 All of the attorneys reported that they received training during the last year. Reviews of the training were mixed. Although some attorneys found the helpful, others noted that some of the were not useful and did not focus enough on issues related to their daily practice. c. Experience with Supervision As shown in Figure 9.3, almost half (48%) of attorneys said they received formal supervision 193 weekly or bi-weekly; 12% reported receiving formal supervision less than monthly; and 18% reported that they did not receive formal supervision. percent of attorneys reported that their supervisors are available for consultation. An additional 35% of attorneys reported that their supervisors are available. Most attorneys (88%) reported that the majority of time in supervision was spent discussing legal clinical issues, as opposed to administrative issues. Figure 9.3: Frequency of Supervision Provided to Attorneys (n 17 attorneys) 194 n 17. attorney supervisors who were interviewed for this study were excluded from this analysis. Supervising attorneys typically have smaller caseloads than staff attorneys in order to carry out their supervisory functions. 0 bar association. (2004). Standards of Practice for Lawyers Representing Child Welfare Agencies, p 20. r Sep- 9, 2009 from data provided to children’s rights by the a for children’s Services, June 18, 2009. N for the purpose of this study, is defined as regularly scheduled, meetings between the attorney and their attorney supervisors who were interviewed for this study were excluded from this analysis. Proportions do not total 100% due to 24% 24% 18% of Attorneys Frequency of Formal No formal less than monthly Generally bi-weekly Generally weekly L y court 181 |d. Resources for Attorneys The availability of staff, adequate office space, and have a big impact on the ability of attorneys to fulfill their obligations. Many attorneys interviewed for this study reported the need for additional office many of their offices are crowded with coworkers and case well as the need for additional support staff and laptops. attorneys also reported the need for additional paralegal support. Figure 9.4 below summarizes the key resource issues identified by attorneys. It is notable that 88% said they never have access to a laptop; 40% said they or have access to inter-pretation services; and 32% said they or have access to private interview space. Figure 9.4: Availability of Resources for Attorneys (N 25, unless otherwise noted) 195 2. Attorneys for Children The Legal Aid Society Juvenile Rights Practice represents the majority of children in foster care. 196 Children’s Rights interviewed a group of attorneys who were representing a of the children in the study .197 a. Attorney Caseloads and T to the average caseload for attorneys for children is 163 children. 198 The New Y State Office of Court Administration issued a new court rule effective April 2008 setting the maximum caseload of attorneys for children at 150. 199 The National Association of Counsel for Children recommends caseloads of no more than 100 clients for attorneys representing children in abuse and neglect cases. 200 The reported turnover rate for attorneys was 12% from June 1, 2008 to June 1, 2009.201 Proportions do not total 100% due to rounding. La for children also represents many children that have been abused and neglected or placed voluntarily in foster care by their parents. However, by design, all of the children in the study sample were represented by interviewees included 20 staff attorneys and three attorneys who were supervisors (but were representing children in the study sample). t attorneys were each interviewed twice because, by chance, they represented two children whose cases were ed for interviews. in the analyses of attorney experience, training, supervision, and access to resources, these responses are included only once (see appendix a: methodology for details). data provided to children’s rights by t he Legal aid Society, Juvenile rights Practice, June 12, 2009. N. y. Comp. r. r tit. 22, 127.5 (2009). t he maximum caseload may be adjusted based on factors such as the level of activity required at different phases of a proceeding, the representation of multiple children in a case, and the availability and use of support staff. 00 d P., Jr., r m., v m. (2001). Recommendations for Representation of Children in Abuse and Neglect Cases. d co: National association of c for children, p. 7. data provided to children’s rights by t he Legal aid Society, Juvenile rights Practice, July 31, Sometimes Never Adequate workspace 84% 8% 8% Private interview space 68% 24% 8% laptop 8% 4% 88% cell phone 96% 0% 4% wireless device 96% 0% 4% Interpretation services (n 17) 58% 29% 11% Clerical support 80% 20% 0% 182 L y court b. Experience and Training Seventeen percent of the 23 attorneys interviewed had been a attorney for two years or less. percent had more than 10 years of experience. The range of experience was 1 to 33 years. Virtually all (96%) attorneys interviewed reported that they did receive training; how- ever, 30% of attorneys stated that they did not receive training on how to approach youth’s ambiva-lence or hostility toward adoption or to counsel youth on open adoption. 202 c. Attorneys Experience with shown in Figure 9.5 below only 15% of attorneys said they received formal supervision weekly or bi-weekly However, the vast majority (95%) of attorneys reported that their supervisors are (50%) or (45%) available for consultation and indicated that supervision occurs on an basis. All (100%) of the attorneys interviewed said that the majority of time in supervi-sion was spent discussing legal clinical issues, as opposed to administrative issues. Figure 9.5: Frequency of Supervision Provided to Attorneys (n 20 attorneys) 203 d. Resources for Attorneys Similar to attorneys, attorneys interviewed for this study reported the need for additional office many of their offices are crowded with coworkers and case well as the need for additional support staff. attorneys reported the need for additional paralegal support and frequently stated that they need hand-held wireless devices or cell phones and additional social workers and clerical support. Figure 9.6 below summarizes the key resource issues identified by attorneys. It is notable that 87% of attorneys said they have access to a handheld wireless device; 78% said they have access to a cell phone; 52% said they or have access to private interview space; 39% said they or have access to adequate workspace; and 37% said they or have access to interpretation services. N 23. attorney supervisors who were interviewed for this study were excluded from this of Attorneys Frequency of Formal No formal supervision Generally less than monthly Generally bi-weekly Generally weekly L y court 183 |Figure 9.6: Availability of Resources for Attorneys (N 23, unless otherwise 3. Attorneys for Parents a. T of Representation Parents who cannot afford to hire an attorney can be represented by an attorney who is assigned by the court. 205 These private to as or typically solo practitioners and may also be assigned to represent children in Family Court. These attorneys must make an application in court in order to enlist the assistance of social workers and other professionals when needed. Parents can also be represented by institutional providers, which are legal services organizations and university law clinics. In Manhattan, the Bronx, and Brooklyn, the institutional providers include the Center for Family Representation in Manhattan, Bronx Defenders, and the Brooklyn Family Defense have the largest contracts with the City to represent parents involved with the child wel-fare system. Institutional providers can offer training, supervision, and oversight of their attorneys as well as provide support staff that may include social workers, paralegals, and parent advocates. Finally a parent can hire a private attorney or may choose to represent him or herself. As shown in Figure 9.7, most parents in this study were represented by assigned counsel attorneys). (This was expected given that the large contracts with the three main institutional providers were implemented only two years ago, and the study sample criteria that all children were in foster care for at least two years as of September 30, 2008.) Figure 9.7: T of Legal Representation for Parents 206 Proportions do not total 100% due to rounding. Law 2004). Parents were excluded from this analysis if they were not a respondent on the case, unknown, whereabouts unknown (in some but not all cir deported, or deceased or if the child was legally free as of September 30, 2008. data were missing for four children as to their mothers and nine children as to their fathers. Proportions do not total 100% due to Sometimes Never Adequate workspace 61% 35% 4% Private interview space 48% 48% 4% cell phone 9% 13% 78% wireless device 13% 0% 87% Interpretation services (n 22) 64% 32% 5% Clerical support 57% 44% 0% 3% 4%1%18%90% 79% (n 93) Fathers (n of Parents Type of Not Represented by an Attorney Private Attorney Institutional Provider Attorney Attorney 184 L y court Some parents who participated in focus groups for this study said that their attorneys do not return their phone calls and do not have or take enough time to meet with them before court. attorneys themselves identified the serious problem of not receiving the Permanency Hearing Report in time to review it with their clients prior to a hearing. (This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4: Casework.) It should be noted that Children’s Rights attempted to obtain various pieces of data regard- parent representation from the Family Court, the office of Assigned Counsel, and the Law Guardian Programs of the First and Second Judicial Departments, Appellate Division, State of New Y Unified Court System, including the proportion of parents represented by attorneys versus institutional providers, caseload data, and data reflecting the frequency with which social workers are utilized by attorneys. Unfortunately these data are incomplete or not currently available. b. Caseloads Children’s Rights requested law counsel caseload data from the First and Second Judicial law guardian programs. The First Department covers the Bronx and Manhattan and the Second Department covers Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. Caseload data were received for Brooklyn, Queens, and Manhattan. In 2008, attorneys serving on the law counsel panels in these three boroughs had an average of 67 It should be noted that these data likely the number of clients these attorneys are carrying for two reasons. First, the 67 includes include both cases, which may include individual children as well as sibling groups, and clients, which refer to individual adult clients. 207 Second, these attorneys are in private practice and may also represent clients who are not assigned by the Court and are not included in the caseload data. Caseloads of the three institutional providers range from 75-85 parents. 208 The American Bar Association’s Standards Drafting Committee recommends caseload of no more than 50-100 cases depending on what the attorney can handle competently The type of practice the attorney has, whether the attorney is part of a multidisciplinary representation team, also has an impact on the appropriate caseload 209 c. Resources for both attorneys and attorneys from each of the three institutional participated in the focus group for this study reported that when they have access to resources such as social workers and parent advocates, this can make a considerable difference in their ability to represent their clients and assist their clients in getting the services that they need. Parents who participated in a focus group for this study made similar comments. As noted above, institutional providers do provide support staff. attorneys can obtain an order from the Court to engage the assistance of a social worker. However, no data are available regard-ing the frequency with which such requests are made and granted. data provided to children’s rights by the State of New y unified c System, appellate division, Second Judicial depart- La w guardian Program, July 2009. data provided to children’s rights by the c enter for f r the f defense Project, and the defenders, august September 2009. bar association. (2006). Standards of Practice for Attorneys Representing Parents in Abuse and Neglect Cases, p. 32. retrieved September 9, 2009 from Parent Parent L y court 185 |iii. Fir St 10 S Although can take a child into foster care on an emergency basis and obtain court approval within hours thereafter, all placements of children in foster care must be authorized by the Family Court. This section provides the study findings regarding various court proceedings that are required when children are remanded under Article 10 of the Family Court Act or placed voluntarily including the length of time it takes to move cases from remand to to Disposition, and remand to Disposition, and the timeliness of request for court approval of voluntary placements. A. OF A Children can enter foster care as a result of one of two types of legal authority either as the result of a court remand or of a voluntary placement. In order for a child to be placed as the result of a court re-mand, must file a petition that states the allegations of abuse neglect and request a child be remanded. A hearing is held and the Court must determine whether a remand is necessary to ensure the safety of the child. A voluntary placement occurs when a parent requests or agrees to voluntarily place their child and then signs a V Placement OF the P F Y ally 186 L y court percent of the children in the study sample were remanded and 3% were placed volun-tarily by their 1. Children Who Enter Foster Care Via Court to and following the remand of a child there are many hearings that may be held. Prior to obtain-ing a remand order, a 1027 hearing is held to address issues related to the removal of a child from home. This hearing must be held within a day when it is either required or requested (depending on the case circumstances). 211 When the remand is granted by the Court, the parents (or another person that is legally responsible for the child) or the attorney for the child can request an emergency to as a 1028 order to ask for the child’s return home prior to the disposition of the case. This hearing must be held within three days of the request, which is typically made within a few days of the child’s removal from his or her home. 212 At the Hearing, the Court is responsible for determining whether or not a child has been abused or neglected and by whom. In some cases, parents admit to the Court that they abused or neglected their child; in other cases a trial is held. When a trial is held, the judge then makes a decision regarding whether or not the legal standard of proof has been met to find that the child was in fact abused or neglected. If the legal standard is not met regarding any of the allegations in the petition, the petition must be dismissed and the child can return home. If the legal standard of proof is met for at least one allegation, the court makes a finding of abuse neglect, that abuse or neglect has oc-curred. (The study findings regarding the types of decisions that were made are provided in Chapter 1: Demographics, Case Opening, and Current Case Status.) If the Court makes a finding, the case then moves to the Disposition Hearing. At this stage, the judge makes the decision regarding whether a child will go home or remain in foster care. If the judge deter-mines that the child must remain in foster care, the judge will enter an order placing the child in care and enter additional orders, which may include orders regarding the permanency goal, service provi-sion, and visit schedules between children and their parents. Regardless of whether or not the Disposition Hearings have been completed, by law the initial Permanency Hearing must begin eight months from the date the child was remanded. It is critical that the and the Disposition (when applicable) are completed prior to the first Permanency Hearing because, as noted above, the purpose of Permanency Hearings is to monitor a child’s safety and the family’s progress, and the efforts being made to either safely return the child home or find another permanent home for the child. It is premature, in most cases, for the Court to be making decisions about the appropriate permanency plan for the child before the Court has even decided whether abuse or neglect has occurred, or made a determination at the Disposition Hearing regarding whether the child can return home, or made the necessary orders regarding needed services. It is important to note that, as stated above, the only hearings that are required by statute to be held within a specific period of time are 1027 hearings, 1028 hearings, and P H New Y State law does not establish time frames within which Disposition, or T of Parental Rights Hearings must be held. The law states only that court shall give priority to pro-ceedings abuse or in which a child has been removed from home before a final order of disposition. Any adjournment granted in the course of such a proceeding should be for as short a time one child was initially remanded and later placed pursuant to a v Placement a t his child is included here in the remand data. N. y. Ct. 1027 2008). N. y. Ct. 1028 2008). L y court 187 |as is Given caseloads and congested calendars, as discussed above, adjournments are typically for many months ahead and are a critical factor in delaying permanency for children in New Y City The next sections provide data regarding the time frame from a child’s remand into foster care to the completion of the the time frame from the to the Disposition, and the over-all time frame from remand to Disposition. a. Time Frame from Remand of Child into Foster Care to Completion of The study collected data regarding how long it took from the remand of the child into foster care to the completion of the The mean and median lengths of time from remand to the order were 10.6 and 7.9 months, respectively The lengths of time ranged from less than three months to more than three years. 214 Figure 9.8 provides additional detail regarding the length of time from remand to the order. As shown, (32%) of children’s cases took more than a year from remand to the completion of the Figure 9.8: Length of Time from Remand to Order (n 132) 215 For 47% of all children in the study sample, the orders were entered more than eight months after the children were remanded. This eight month point is an important demarcation because, as noted above, the first Permanency Hearing must be held eight months after a child is remanded (Permanency Hearings are discussed in detail later in this chapter). N. y. Ct. 1049 2008). n 119 f or children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date of the remand and the date of the order. f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date of remand and the later date of the f orders (if the orders as to each parent did not occur on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child was placed pursuant to a v Placement a if the f preceded the remand; if data were missing as to whether or not the f was completed; if the date of the remand the f order was unable to be determined; or if the f decision was still pending as of September 30, 2008. one additional child’s case was excluded because the child was initially remanded and then placed pursuant to a v Placement a prior to a f order. for children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date of the remand and the date of the f or f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date of remand and the later date of the orders (if the orders as to each parent did not occur on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child was placed Pursuant to a v Placement a if the f preceded the remand; or if data were miss as t o whether or not the f was completed. one additional child’s case was excluded because the child was initially remanded and then placed pursuant to a v Placement a prior to a f 4%8% 6%14%15%17%21% of Children Length of not completed as of than 24 24 18 12 8 6 than 3 months 188 L y court It should be noted that many of the children in this sample entered foster care before the Permanency Law was implemented. Thus, we analyzed the time from remand to specifically for the of 32 children (24%) who were remanded after Dec. 21, 2005. 216 In fact, for 58% of these children, the was entered or still pending more than eight months after the children were remanded. In these cases, Permanency Hearings should have begun and may in fact have been complet-ed prior to the Court even determining whether abuse or neglect had occurred. b. Time Frame from to Disposition The mean and median lengths of time from to Disposition were 4.3 and 2 months, respectively The range was the same day to 6.2 years. 217 Figure 9.9 provides the lengths of time from to Disposition for children in the study sample. For more than half of the children in the study sample (57%), the length of time from to Disposition was less than three months. However, for 19% of children the length of time was more than six months. Figure 9.9: Length of Time from to Disposition (n 127) 218 n 132. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if they were remanded prior to 21, 2005; if they were placed pursu-ant t o a v Placement a or if data regarding whether the f was completed as to all applicable parents was unable to be determined. t he analysis also excludes one child who was initially remanded after 21, 2005 and then placed pursuant to a v Placement a prior to a f order. n 120 f or children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date of the f order and the date of the disposition order. f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date of the first f act- finding order and the later date of the disposition orders (if the orders as to each parent were not made on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child was placed pursuant to a v Placement a if the f c the remand; if the date of the f disposition order was missing; if the date of the f d was unable to be determined; if the f disposition decision was still pending as of September 30, 2008; or if data were missing as to whether the f disposition was completed. r the longest length of time finding of 6.2 years, it should be noted that the second longest length of time was 1.6 years. t this one case appears to be an outlier. for children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date of the f order and the date of the disposition order. f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date of the first f order and the later disposition order (if the orders as to each parent were not made on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child was placed Pursuant to a v Placement a if the f preceded the remand; if the f was not yet completed; or if data were missing as to whether the f disposition was completed. one additional child’s case was excluded from this analysis because the child was initially remanded and then placed pursuant to a voluntary Placement a prior to a f decision. Proportions do not total 100% due to 19% 10% 9% of Children Length of Disposition not completed as of than 12 12 months 3+ 6 months less than 3 months L y court 189 |c. Time Frame from Remand to Disposition The mean length of time from remand to Disposition was 14 months; the median was 11 months. The range was .2 months to 6.2 years. 219 Figure 9.10 provides detail regarding the length of time from remand to Disposition for the children in the study sample. Figure 9.10: Length of Time from Remand to Disposition (n 127)220 As noted above, since December 2005, the Court is responsible for holding the first Permanency Hear- when the child has been remanded for eight months (Permanency Hearings are discussed in detail later in this chapter). As shown in Figure 9.10 above, just less than of children’s cases (32%) moved from remand to Disposition in less than eight months. Because many of the children in the study sample entered foster care before the was implemented, we analyzed the time from remand to Disposition specifically for the of 31 children (24%) who were remanded after December 21, 2005 and had a Disposition that was either completed or pending as of September 30, 2008. 221 In fact, 72% of these children had Dispositions that took more than eight months. In these cases, Permanency Hearings should have begun and may in fact have been completed prior to entering the Disposition order. In addition to analyzing the proportion of children who entered foster care after the was enacted in order to determine what proportion of these cases should have had a Permanency n 123. for children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date of the remand and the date of the disposition order. f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date of the remand and the later date of the disposition orders (if the orders as to each parent were not made on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child was placed pursuant to a v Placement a if the date of the remand disposition was unable to be determined; if the f the disposition was still pending as of September 30, 2008; if the f preceded the remand; or if data were missing as to whether or not the f disposition was completed. one additional child’s case was excluded from this analysis because the child was initially remanded and then placed pursuant to a v Place agreement prior to a f decision. f or children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date of the remand and the date of the for children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date of remand and the later date of disposition (if the disposition as to each parent did not occur on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child was placed pursuant to a v Placement a if the f had not yet been completed; if the f preceded the remand; or if data were missing as to whether or not the f disposition was completed. one additional child’s case was excluded from this analysis because the child was initially remanded and then placed pursuant to a v Placement agreement prior to a f decision. n 12 7. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the f was still pending as of September 30, 2008; if they were placed pursuant to a v Placement a or if data regarding whether the disposition was completed as to all par was unable to be determined. t he analysis also excludes one child who was initially remanded after 21, 2005 and then placed pursuant to a v Placement a prior to a f 22%21% 8% 5%9% of Children Length of Disposition not completed as of 9/30/0836+ months 24+ 36 24 18 12 than 8 months 190 L y court Hearing prior to the Disposition of the case, we also analyzed whether the length of time from remand to Disposition has changed over time and particularly since the passage of Permanency Law In order to assess change over time, we compared the mean length of time from remand to Disposition for children who were remanded prior to the Permanency Law n 92; mean 14.5 months) to children who were remanded after the Permanency Law (n 31; mean 13.4 months). 222 The difference between the two groups was not statistically significant. Although this analysis does not control for other factors that might influence length of time from remand to Disposition, it does suggest that the length of time from remand to Disposition has not changed significantly since the Permanency Law was enacted. As shown in the findings above, the length of time it takes for cases to proceed from remand to Dispo-sition, whether children were remanded more recently or less recently is, in many cases, an unaccept-ably slow process. In fact, each step of the remand to and from to many children remain in foster care for many months or even years while each stage of the court process is completed. Stakeholders, including attorneys for parents and judges, reported that, in some cases, many months after the child has been remanded, the parents will request a 1028 hearing, which is typically held a few days after a child is remanded. In these cases, the parents are asking the Court to consider returning their child(ren) to their care at a 1028 hearing because many months may have gone by and the case is not moving forward in court. The parents may have completed the required services yet the Disposition Hearings have not yet occurred, so the parents request a 1028 hearing because, as noted above, these hearings must be held within three days of the request. Virtually all of the stakeholders who participated in focus groups and interviews for this study talked at length about the number of adjournments and the length of time between adjournments for all types of court hearings (abuse and neglect, termination of parental rights, permanency) as being a critical concern. As seen in the findings above, abuse and neglect court decisions (as well as termination of parental rights court decisions, which are discussed in detail later in this chapter) can take a long time to complete while the children remain separated from their families and without a permanent home. There are many reasons why Family Court cases are adjourned. For example, an attorney a caseworker, or a parent may not be present; a witness may not be available; a party may not be ready to proceed; or the Court may not have sufficient time to complete the hearing on a given day Each adjournment further delays the process and extends the child’s stay in foster care. (This study did not collect quan-titative data on the reasons for adjournments in Article 10 proceedings. Data were collected regarding reasons Permanency Hearings were not completed in a timely fashion; these data are provided in Sec-tion IV of this chapter.) Another reason for adjournments noted by some stakeholders pertained to incarcerated parents sometimes not being brought to Family Court by their correctional facilities when their cases are scheduled to be heard. This is a issue that involves Family Court, which must complete the necessary paperwork to have the parent brought to Family Court, as well as the criminal justice system, which must process the paperwork and transport the parent. Regarding one case, a stakeholder noted that the beginning, hearings got adjourned because the father was incarcerated. His facil-ity required two weeks notice to produce the father at a hearing. Sometimes the facility would say they hadn’t received proper notice. Sometimes the father didn’t want to come to the hearing but didn’t com-municate that to his attorney children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if they were placed pursuant to a v Placement a if the disposi-tion w as pending as of September 30, 2008; or if the date of remand disposition was missing. t he analysis also excludes one child who was initially remanded and then placed pursuant to a v Placement a prior to a f order. L y court 191 |2. Voluntary Placements When a parent voluntarily places child in foster care and the plan is for the child to remain in placement for more than 30 days, must file a petition and a hearing must be held. During this hear-ing the Court reviews the V Placement Agreement signed by the parent and ensures that the parent’s decision to place the child was in fact voluntary that efforts were initially made to prevent the child’s removal from home, and that ongoing efforts are being made to return the child home. Six children in the study sample were placed on a voluntary basis. filed the petition as required within 30 days for only one of these six children. As noted above, in 2005, a new was passed in New Y State. These new and re-vised statutes include the requirement that Permanency Hearings be held eight months after the Court orders that a child be removed from his or her home and every six months thereafter for the duration of the child’s stay in foster care. 223 The purpose of these hearings is to improve permanency outcomes for children through regularly scheduled judicial reviews of the case circumstances, the appropriateness of the permanency goals, and the efforts made to achieve permanency The Court must also issue orders to expedite permanency and ensure the safety and of children in foster care, as well as to determine when to discharge children from foster care. The following sections present the study findings regarding various issues pertaining to Permanency Hearings, including findings, timeliness of Permanency Hearings, and reasons that untimely hearings were adjourned. The study collected data regarding the Permanency Hearings that were held for the children in the study sample during the period from October 1, 2006 through September 30, 2008. (Note, this is a period. The majority of other measures in the study cover a period.) More than 500 Permanency Hearings were held during this time period pertaining to the children in the study sample. N. y. Ct. Y Ad S CS. Parent 192 L y court A. S After reviewing all of the evidence presented at each Permanency Hearing, the judge or referee must determine whether the foster care agency and by extension made what are referred to as efforts to achieve for each child. Making entails providing case-work and other services needed to either reunite a child with his or her family or to develop and finalize another permanency plan, such as adoption, if the child cannot safely return home. Making reasonable efforts is both a federal and New Y State requirement, and affects the receipt of federal funding. Data were collected for 463 of these hearings regarding whether the Court had determined that reason- able efforts to achieve permanency had been made by the foster care agency The Court determined in all but six of these Permanency Hearings that reasonable efforts to achieve permanency had been made. Given that all of the children in the study sample had been in foster care for at least two years, and that many had been in care much longer, and given the quality of casework found in these cases (as described elsewhere in this report), the fact that in nearly all of the hearings the Court found that reasonable efforts to achieve permanency had been made raises questions regarding the threshold used to make these determinations, and the relevance of such findings. As noted above, stakeholders said that the Court does not frequently or consistently use its power to hold and the foster care agencies accountable through the use of court orders, sanctions, etc. These data may provide another example of this issue. B. OF New Y State law requires that each Permanency Hearing be completed within 30 days of the date the hearing was scheduled to begin (commonly referred to as the Permanency Hearing Date Certain). 224 During the period from October 1, 2006 through September 30, 2008, more than half (55%) of the children in the study sample had one or more Permanency Hearings that were not completed within 30 days as required. Delays in completing Permanency Hearings result in delayed court reviews and court orders and can have considerable impact on the length of time it takes for children to achieve permanency Figure 9.11: Proportion of Children with Timely Permanency Hearings During a T Y ear Period, by Child (n 147) 225 As noted above, 55% (81) of the children in the study sample had one or more Permanency Hearings that were not completed within 30 days, as required. Figure 9.12 provides the number of Permanency Hearings that were not completed within 30 days for these 81 children. N. y. Ct. 2008). n 14 7. one child had no Permanency Hearings during the period, and data were missing for five 45% One or More Permanency Hearings Not Completed Permanency Hearings Completed Timely L y court 193 |Figure 9.12: Number of Permanency Hearings That W ere Not Completed Timely by Child (n 81) C. NO t Y The figure above reflects a total of 134 hearings that were not completed timely Figure 9.13 below provides the reasons, according to the attorney for the child, that 91 of these Permanency Hearings were not completed within 30 days. (Data were not provided for the remaining 43 hearings.) Almost half (48%) of the hearings were not completed within 30 days because the Permanency Hearing Reports, which are prepared and submitted by the provider agency caseworker (Permanency Hearing Reports are discussed in detail in Chapter 4: Casework) were not submitted to the parties timely and 20% of hearings were not completed timely because the Permanency Report did not sufficiently ad-dress the issues in the case. Insufficient court time was noted as a reason for not completing the hearing timely for 26% of de-layed Permanency Hearings. T percent of hearings were not completed timely because the provider agency caseworker was not present, and 20% were not completed timely because the caseworker was not present. (In some cases both a provider agency caseworker and an caseworker are assigned to the case.) It should be noted that data regarding the reasons Permanency Hearings were not completed timely were provided by the attorneys for the children; therefore it is possible that the data may not fully reflect instances in which Permanency Hearings were delayed because the attorney was not present. 48% 40% 11% of Children Number of Hearings Not Completed 4 3 2 1 194 L y court Figure 9.13: Reasons Permanency Hearings W ere Not Completed Timely (n 91 In addition to the data collected from the attorneys, other stakeholders who participated in focus groups and interviews for this study reported many of the same reasons for Permanency Hearings not being completed timely including caseworkers attorneys not being present, the lack of Perma-nency Hearing Reports late Permanency Hearing Reports, and crowded court calendars. It is also important to bear in mind that, between Permanency Hearings, a parent through their attorney the foster care agency through the attorney or the attorney for the child, for file a motion requesting that a case be put on the court’s calendar to address a pressing issue, such as an application to return the child home before the next Permanency Hearing. Judges and referees who participated in a focus group for this study reported that these applications are rare and that it seems that foster care provider agencies are reluctant to affirmatively ask the court to send children home, regardless of the circumstances. Judges and referees noted that these requests are a pri-mary function of the caseworker and the provider agency yet, in practice, these requests are few and far between. It is their impression that foster care provider agencies do not want to risk being responsible for a bad outcome. Other stakeholders, particularly parents and attorneys, reported that in some cases attorneys for children are reluctant to support recommendations to return children home, and judges and referees are reluctant to return children home. When considered all together, these con-cerns can lead to a stalemate for children and their families. These are complex decisions, but are ones that, based on comprehensive assessments and professional judgment, must be made. Hearings were excluded from this analysis if the attorneys for the children were not able to determine the reason(s) hearings were not completed timely, or if data were missing. Proportions do not total 100% because more than one reason for not completing a Permanency Hearing within 30 days could be 10% 20% 30% 40% 50%22% 48% 20% 5% 3% 13% 26% 4% 2% 2% 3%16% 20%24% 20% 9% 3%18% for child requested adjournment to interview not not not caseworker not care caseworker not attorney not attorney not parent's attorney not court not attorney Hearing Report not Hearing Report not submitted notices not sent timely Proportion of Permanency Hearings Not Completed Timely L y court 195 |V. OF P Al right S In order for a child to be legally free for adoption, parental rights must be surrendered or terminated. The process for terminating parental rights involves multiple casework practices and legal procedures that must be completed in order to free a child for adoption. From establishing the Adoption goal to the signing of the court order that ultimately frees a child for adoption, the process can take anywhere from a few months to many years to complete. The following sections present data on various legal practices regarding parental rights, including voluntary surrenders and termination of parental rights petitions, as well as the study findings regarding the process of moving cases through the court system. 227 it is important to note that, by design, none of the children in the study sample had been adopted. t he purpose of this study was to examine the circumstances of children who were still in care. in any case, once a child is adopted, the case record is sealed and unavailable for review. Report ..I.re- vie .him Parent dis ..and. en t 196 L y court It should be noted that, although attorneys represent and, by extension, the foster care provider agencies in abuse and neglect cases, V Placement cases, and Permanency Hearings, the provider agencies in New Y City must employ attorneys or hire private attorneys to handle V Surrender and cases. These responsibilities include preparing and filing V Surrenders and petitions, and representing the provider agencies throughout the and adoption process. A. OF P Al right S In some cases, parents make the difficult decision to voluntarily surrender their parental rights. Dur-ing the review period, surrenders were signed by two children’s mothers and another child’s father. 228 T woof these children became legally free as the result of the surrenders, which were signed when they had been in foster care for 6.7 and 8.8 years. For the third child, the mother had signed a sur-render after the child had been in foster care for 4.6 years; however, the father did not sign a surrender, and the case against him continued. This child was not yet legally free at the end of the review pe-riod. More detail regarding casework practice in relation to the surrender of parental rights is provided in Chapter 5: Adoption Casework. B. the One of the requirements of the federal Adoption and Safe Families Act which was signed into law in 1997, is that a petition to terminate parental rights be filed on behalf of children who have been in foster care for 15 of the most recent 22 months, except when there are reasons, as discussed in Section 2 below 229 It is important to bear in mind that foster care agencies are responsible for filing these petitions, but judges have the authority to order that these petitions be filed. 1. Filing Petitions All of the children in the study sample had been in foster care for more than 15 of the most recent 22 months. In fact, by design, all of the children had been in foster care for at least two years. However, as shown in Figure 9.14, 69% of children in the sample who were not legally free did not have peti-tions filed as of the last day of the review period. 230 Figure 9.14 also provides these data broken down by permanency goal. All of the children in the sample with a goal of Adoption had a petition filed on their behalf, although most were very delayed, as described below Eight percent of children with a goal of Return to Parent had petitions filed. n 116. children became legally free prior to the review period. data were not collected regarding whether any of the parents of these 37 children signed a surrender. adoption and Safe f a ct of 1997, Pub. L. 105-89, 111 Stat. 2115 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 42 u .S.c.). analyses regarding whether a petition was filed are based only on children in the study sample who were not legally free because a fixed proportion of children that were legally free as of September 30, 2008 was deliberately selected for inclusion in the s sample. t o include these children in these analyses would therefore force a certain proportion of answers to the question of whether or not petitions were filed. analyses of the timeliness of filings and proceedings include all children who had filed, regardless of whether the children were legally free. L y court 197 |Figure 9.14: Proportion of Children with a Petition Considering each parent separately petitions were not filed for 69% of mothers and 70% of Data regarding the proportion of mothers and fathers against whom a petition was filed are provided in Figure 9.15, for all children and by goal. As shown in this figure, petitions were filed against 100% of mothers of children with a goal of Adoption (although most were delayed, as discussed below) and 8% of mothers of children with a goal of Return to Parent, and the findings are similar for fathers. Figure 9.15: Petitions Filed as to Mothers and In addition to collecting whether a petition was filed, data were collected regarding when, during the course of the case, they were filed. For children that had a petition filed on their behalf, we analyzed the length of time from the child’s entry into foster care to the filing of the petition as to at least one parent, which is the first step in the legal process. As shown in Figure 9.16, of those children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the children were already legally free as of September 30, 2008, or if the relevant parent was unknown or deceased. Legally free children were excluded because a fixed proportion of children who were legally fr as of Sept, 30, 2008 was deliberately selected for inclusion in the study sample. (more detail regarding sample selection is provided in appendix a.) t o include these children in this analysis would therefore force a certain proportion of answers to the question of whether or not petitions were filed as to their parents. mothers: n 102; fathers: n 88. children’s cases were excluded from these analyses if the children were legally free as of September 30, 2008 or if the relevant parent was unknown or deceased. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the children were already legally free as of September 30, 2008 or if the r parent was unknown or deceased. data were missing regarding four 8% 9%91% 30% 0%70% 69%92%100% 31% 8% Filed Not of Children 020%40%60%80%100% Children with a Goal of Adoption as to Father (n with a Goal of as to Father (n Children as to Father (n with a Goal of Adoption as to Mother (n with a Goal of as to Mother (n Children as to Mother (n 102)31%69% 8%92%100% 0% Filed Not of Children 020%40%60%80%100% Children with a Goal of Adoption, Not Legally Free (n with a Goal of (n Children, Not Legally Free (n 106) 198 L y court children with a petition filed as to at least one parent, only 7% had the petition filed within 15 months of entering foster The mean and median lengths of time from children’s entry into foster care to the filing of the petition as to at least one parent were 3.2 and 2.5 years, respectively The lengths of time ranged from seven months to 13.3 years. 235 Figure 9.16 provides detail regarding the length of time from foster care entry to the filing of the petition as to at least one parent of children in the study sample. (Because only six children with a goal of Return to Parent had a filed, Figure 9.16 does not break down the length of time from entry to filing by goal.) 236 of children were in foster care for three years or more before a petition was filed and were in foster care for four or more years before a petition was filed. Figure 9.16: Length of Time from Foster Care Entry to Petition Filed as to at Least One Parent (n 75) 237 Figure 9.16 above reflects when a was filed for any parent. Regarding mothers specifically the lengths of time from the child’s entry into foster care to the filing of petitions ranged from 7 months to 13.3 years. Regarding fathers, the lengths of time from the child’s entry into foster care to the filing of petitions ranged from 14 months to 13.3 years. 238 Figure 9.17 provides the mean and median lengths of time from entry to the filing of petitions as to mothers and fathers. As shown, there was practically no difference in the mean or median lengths of time from foster care entry to filing petitions against mothers and fathers. Figure 9.17: Mean and Median Length of Time from Entry to Filing Petitions, by Parent, in Y ears 239 n 6 7. petitions were filed as to at least one parent of 75 children in the sample. However, the date the petition was filed as to either parent was unable to be determined regarding eight of these children. n 6 7. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the date the petition was filed as to either parent was unable to be determined; or if both parents were unknown deceased; or if no petition was filed as to either of the child’s parents. including the lengths of time from entry to filing for the six children with a goal of r to Parent does not meaningfully change the overall breakdown depicted in figure 9.16. one child had a filed less than 15 months after entering care, four children had a filed between 24 and 36 months after entering care, and one child had a filed between 36 and 48 months after entering care. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if no was filed as to either parent, or if both parents were unknown or deceased. mothers: n 64; fathers: n 44. children’s cases were excluded from these analyses if a parent was deceased or unknown or if the date the petition was filed was unable to be determined. Legally free children are included in this analysis and all subsequent of analyses because, unlike the data findings above regarding whether or not petitions were filed, the length of time it took to file petitions was not one of the sample selection criteria. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if a parent was deceased or unknown or if the date the petition was filed was unable to be Median Mothers (n 64) 3.3 2.5 Fathers (n 44) 3.4 2.57% 7%13% of Children Length of More than 60 60 48 36 24 than 15 months L y court 199 |2. Compelling Reasons Not to File Petitions When a petition is not filed for a child who has been in foster care more than 15 out of 22 months, foster care agencies are required to document a for not doing so. According to federal law exceptions to the filing requirement include general circumstances in which: 1) the child is being cared for by a relative; 2) filing a petition would not be in the child’s best inter-ests; or 3) the family has not been provided with the services for the safe return of the child to the child’s 240 New Y State law requires a case by case determination regarding whether a petition should be filed and provides the following list of circumstances that may excuse the local social services district from filing a 1) the child is being cared for by a relative; 2) filing a peti-tion is not in the child’s best interest due to a or 3) the agency has not provided the parents with the services needed to ensure the safety of the child if the child were to return home. The law also identifies certain possible compelling reasons not to file a petition, including situations in which the child is 14 years of age or older and will not consent to be adopted, there are insufficient grounds for filing a petition, and the child has a permanency goal other than adoption. Compel-ling reasons must be based on the specific case circumstances and must consider the best interest of the child, as noted above. 241 In order to provide further guidance to the foster care agencies, issued a policy guidance bulletin that identified various case circumstances that constitute a compelling reason not to file a for a particular 242 Similar to New Y State law this policy guidance states that the decision regarding whether or not to file a petition must be based on the individual, case circumstances accordance with the child’s best The policy bulletin identified circumstances including the following: 1) a child over 14 years old who has been counseled but does not want to be adopted; 2) a child for whom a family setting will not currently meet his or her needs; 3) a child who has regular contact with his or her parent(s) and maintaining this contact and relationship benefits the child; 4) a child for whom the best and most likely permanency option is other than (such as legal guardianship by a relative); and 5) least one parent is actively being considered as a discharge resource for the child, and it is anticipated that such discharge is likely to occur within six (See Appendix B for the full policy guidance on this issue.) This study collected the documented reasons for not filing petitions as identified in the case re- cords and compared them to the policy guidance. Of the 71 children for whom a petition was not filed as to either parent, 8% had case records that clearly documented at least one of the compelling reasons identified by 243 For these children (n 6) the following reasons were noted: 1) for four chil-dren, the parent(s) was actively being considered as a discharge resource for the child and it was antici-pated that such discharge was likely to occur within six months; 2) one child was 14 years old or older and did not want to be adopted; and 3) for one child, two compelling reasons were parent made regular contact with the child and maintaining their contact and relationship benefited the child, and the child was 14 years old or older and did not want to be adopted. For an additional 19% of children, the reason documented was that the child was home on trial dis- charge or that the plan was to trial discharge the child. For 11% of children, the agencies documented no compelling reason why they had not filed for a and Safe f a ct of 1997, Pub. L. 105-89, 111 Stat. 2115 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 42 u .S.c.). N. y. Law 2007). Ne w y city a for children’s Services. Bulletin 05-1, Connections Build 18 Procedures: Case Management. i a 23, 2005. data were missing for 2 of the 73 children for which a petition was not filed as to either parent. 200 L y court For the remaining 62% of children other reasons were documented that did not appear to meet the let- or spirit of policy guidance. Examples of these other reasons included: documentation noting that the parent was for the child to return home, but providing no estimate of when final discharge might occur; documentation noting that the parent had but providing no indication of when the child might return home; and documentation simply noting that the child’s goal was Return to Parent, with no further explanation. The above three examples do not appear to meet the letter or spirit of policy guidance, which sug-gests that a compelling reason not to file a petition and to maintain a Return to Parent goal should include the likely time frame by when the child can return home and that this should be within approxi-mately six months (see Appendix B). These examples noted above all focused on continuing efforts to return children home, but did not include any likely time frame for achieving that goal. Of course, for children with a goal of Return to Parent for extended periods of time, the main concern is not simply whether a has been filed or not (as is a means to an end, not an end in and of itself), but rather how and when permanency is going to be achieved. As noted above, the decision regarding whether or not to file a petition must be made on a case by case basis. Return to Parent goals should be meaningfully reevaluated regularly as maintaining the goal of Return to Parent with no end in sight can result in children remaining in foster care for years and years. Many children in the study sample with a goal of Return to Parent had that goal for a very long mean length of time children had a Return to Parent goal was 3.3 years and 24% of children had this goal for more than four years, and, as noted above, only 8% of children in the study sample with a goal of Return to Parent had a petition filed on their behalf. OF P Al right S incapable opportu-nities L y court 201 |T raining for caseworkers and supervisors on what constitutes a compelling reason is needed so that appropriate and timely decisions can be made regarding when to file petitions. In addition, judges and referees play an important role in determining when petitions should be filed and can order that these petitions be filed within a specific period of time, regardless of the child’s goal. Many stakeholders who participated in focus groups and interviews for this study commented that, in some cases, the permanency goal remains Return to Parent longer than it should, noting that foster care provider agencies do not request that the goal be changed as soon as they should, and that judges and referees give parents too many chances over long periods of time, while the children remain in foster care for years. 3. Time Frame from Establishing the Adoption Goal to Filing Petitions The following section provides the study findings regarding the length of time it took to move from establishing the goal of Adoption to filing petitions. The data are presented in two ways. First, the data are presented for the children in the study sample in order to illustrate the experiences of children. Second, the data are presented with regard to mothers and fathers in order to show whether there are differences in this practice pertaining to mothers and fathers. W e analyzed the data regarding the length of time from establishment of the Adoption goal to the filing of the petition as to at least one of the child’s parents. Among children who had a filed as to at least one parent, the foster care agencies took more than three months from goal change to filing a petition for 43% of children. Figure 9.18 provides the lengths of time for all children in the study sample who had a petition filed as to at least one of their parents. Figure 9.18: Length of Time from Adoption Goal Establishment to Petition Filed, by Child (n 69) 244 New Y State regulations require that an action be taken to legally free children within 30 days of the establishment of the Adoption goal. 245 However, 59% of children did not have a filed for either par- (or one parent when only one parent was applicable) within 30 days. f or children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date the child’s permanency goal became a and the date the petition was filed as to that parent. f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between the date the child’s permanency goal became a and the date of the filing of the earliest petition (if the petitions as to each parent did not occur on the same date). children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child had a y goal of r to Parent during the review period or if the child had a permanency goal of a but a petition had not yet been filed as to either parent as of September 30, 2008. Proportions do not total 100% due to rounding. N. y. Comp. r. r tit. 18, (2009).26% 16% 3%10% 4%17% of Children Length of More than 24 24 12 6 3 than 30 before goal changed 202 L y court The lengths of time from establishing the permanency goal of Adoption to filing a petition ranged from the same day to 6.5 years for both mothers and fathers. Figure 9.19 shows the mean and median length of time for each parent. As shown in Figure 9.19, the mean lengths of time are considerably larger than the median lengths of time, because the sample contains a few children who experienced very long lengths of time from goal change to the filing of petitions. For example, three children had the petition filed against their mother more than three years after their goal had been changed to Adoption. Figure 9.19: Mean and Median Length of Time from Establishing Adoption Goal to Filing Petitions, by Parent, in Months 246 Figure 9.20 provides more detail regarding the lengths of time from the establishment of the Adoption goal to the filing of petitions. As shown in the figure, for 16% of mothers and 21% of fathers, the petitions were filed before the child’s permanency goal was changed to Adoption. Figure 9.20: Length of Time from Establishment of Adoption Goal to Petition Filed, by Parent 247 As noted above, New Y State regulations require that action to legally free the child must be initiated within 30 days of the establishment of the permanency planning goal of As shown in Figure 9.20 above, a petition was not filed within that time frame for 62% of mothers and 56% of fathers. Many stakeholders identified the initial stages of the process as the point in time when fathers are sometimes first considered in both casework and legal practice. Prior to this point in many cases, little attention or effort is dedicated to engaging and working with fathers (for more detail regarding case practice with fathers see Chapter 4: Casework, Chapter 6: Caseworker Contacts, and Chapter 8: Services). When the time comes to terminate parental rights, petitions must be filed as to both legal parents. At this late stage, caseworkers must identify and search for fathers, if they have not previously done this as they should have, and this can be very difficult and time consuming. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child had a permanency goal of r to Parent; if the child’s permanency goal was changed to a after the petition was filed; or if the date the a permanency goal was established the date the petition was filed was unable to be determined. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the child had a permanency goal of r to Parent during the review period or if the child had a permanency goal of a but a petition had not yet been filed as to their mother 8%9%17% 14%27%26% 3%2%10%9% 5% 5%14% (n 63) Fathers (n 43) 05%10%15%20%25%30% More than 24 24 12 6 3 30 days before goal of Children Length of Median Mothers (n 44) 8.5 4 Fathers (n 28) 9.1 3.8 L y court 203 |In T of Parental Rights cases, the law differentiates be- tween rights must be terminat-ed or who must consent for a child to be adopted, and those who need only be notified of the termination proceeding and afforded an opportunity to be heard at the Disposition only For example, for a child born if a father is named on the child’s birth certificate but has never presented himself as the father never supported the child or has no relationship with the child), the Court may determine that he does not need to be named as a respondent in the termination case and that he is entitled only to be notified of the proceedings. Some stakeholders, including attorneys for parents, noted that fathers are sometimes treated as when they should in fact be named on the termination petition. For example, in one case re-viewed for this study the Court ordered the agency to file a petition to terminate the father’s rights, rather than treating the father as a only which was the foster care agency’s intention. This is an example of many findings in this report regarding failing to or delaying working with fathers. 4. and Disposition The following sections present the study findings regarding possible outcomes and interim actions that the parties can recommend and the court can take at both the and Disposition stage of processes, including withdrawing and dismissing petitions, suspending the judgment Disposition) and the process of legally freeing children. These actions and outcomes can ultimately lead to permanency but, depending on how they are handled, can also create delays in achieving permanency A. Or A petition may be withdrawn or dismissed for many reasons, including a change in case circum-stances such as the death of a parent, insufficient evidence to support a finding, or the decision by a parent to surrender their parental rights. In the study sample, the petition had been withdrawn or dismissed for the mothers the fathers of 9% of the children who w ere not legal B. Once the judge has made the determination that one or more of the allegations (referred to as a of in petitions) in the petition have been proven, the case then moves to the Disposition stage during which the judge must decide whether to terminate paren-tal rights or provide the parent(s) with another opportunity to do what is necessary to have their child return home, which is referred to as a A suspended judgment typically includes specific tasks, such as services or visits, that the parent(s) must complete with the assis-tance of the foster care agency (referred to as and When a suspended judgment is granted, the parent is given up to one year to fulfill the specific orders of the Court. If the parent does not fulfill the orders of the Court, the Court may either extend the suspended judgment period for up to one additional year or move to free the child for adoption. 249 Although a successful suspended judgment outcome, which results in the child’s return home, can be a positive outcome, the period of suspended judgment lengthens a child’s stay in foster care, both for children who return home and, most importantly for those who cannot return home. n 106. N. y. Ct. 633 204 L y court A suspended judgment was ordered as to the mothers the fathers of 6% of the children who were not legally When the initial suspended judgment period ended, the mother of one child and the father of another child were granted extensions of the suspended judgments. C. Y Once the Court has determined that at least one cause of action has been proven and that a suspended judgment is either not appropriate or that the conditions of a suspended judgment were not met by the parent(s), the Court can then legally free the child for adoption. This is the last step in the process. Once a child is legally free and all of the necessary arrangements and paperwork have been completed, the child can then be adopted (details regarding casework practice related to adoption are provided in Chapter 5: Adoption Casework). There were 47 children in the sample who had a goal of Adoption and were legally free. The following sections provide the study findings regarding various time frames related to freeing these children for adoption. Data are provided regarding the length of time from foster care entry to freeing, establishing the goal of Adoption to freeing, and the length of time from filing the petition to freeing. It is im-portant to note that although these 47 children were legally free, the process of finalizing the adoptions of these children had not yet been completed. Freeing children for adoption and completing adoptions are separate legal processes. 251 Indeed, for some of these children, an adoptive family still needed to be identified and licensed. More detail regarding issues related to completing the adoption process is presented in Chapter 5: Adoption Casework. 1. Entry to Freeing The mean length of time from the date children entered foster care until they became legally free was 5.4 years and the median was 4.8 years. The range was 1.5 years to 13.3 years. 252 For almost half of children (45%) who were legally free, more than five years passed from the day they entered foster care until they became legally free. Figure 9.21 provides detail regarding the length of time from foster care entry to the date children became legally free. Figure 9.21: Length of Time from Foster Care Entry to Date Child Became Legally Free (n 47) 253 n 106. No data are presented in this report regarding adoption finalization because, by design, none of the children in the study sample w ere adopted. t he purpose of this study was to examine barriers to permanency for children still in foster care. further, when children are adopted, case files are sealed and unavailable for study. n 43. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the date the child became legally free was unable to be determined. Proportions do not total 100% due to 11% 4%9%15%30% of Children Length of More than 6 years 5+ 6 years 4+ 5 years 3+ 4 years 2+ 3 years 1 2 years L y court 205 |2. Establishing Adoption Goal to Legal Freeing The mean length of time from establishment of the Adoption goal to legal freeing was 2.4 years and the median was 2.1 years. More than a quarter (26%) of the legally free children in the sample became legally free after more than three years with a goal of Adoption. The longest length of time from establishing the Adoption goal to freeing was 4.6 years. 254 Figure 9.22 provides the lengths of time from establishing the permanency goal of Adoption to becoming legally free for adoption. Figure 9.22: Length of Time from Establishing Adoption Goal to Date Child Became Legally Free (n 47) New Y State regulations require that children be freed within 12 months after the establish- of the permanency planning goal of As shown in the figure above, 77% of children in the study sample were not legally free within that period of time. The responsibility for not meet-ing this requirement can lie with the foster care provider agency court, depending on the case circumstances. 3. Filing Petitions to Legal Freeing For the 47 legally free children in the sample, the mean and median lengths of time from filing the first petition as to either parent to the date the child became legally free was 2.4 and 1.9 years, respectively The lengths of time ranged from 2 months to more than 8 years. 256 In addition, for more than a third of the children who were legally free (34%), this process took more than two years to complete. Figure 9.23 provides the lengths of time from filing the petition to legal freeing for the children in the study sample. n 3 9. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the date the permanency goal or the date the child became legally free were unable to be determined. N. y. Comp. r. r tit. 18, (2009). f or children with one applicable parent, the length is the difference between the date the petition was filed as to that parent and the date the child became legally free. f or children with two applicable parents, the length is the difference between date of the filing of the earliest petition and the date the child became legally free. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if the date the first petition was filed as to at least one parent the date the child became legally free was unable to be 6%32% 17% of Children Length of 4+ 5 years 3+ 4 years 2+ 3 years 1+ 2 years 1 year or less 206 L y court Figure 9.23: Length of Time from Filing of Petition to Date Child Became Legally Free (n 47)257 d. Data were collected regarding the frequency of appeals. Of all children with a goal of Adoption (74 children), 15% had a on appeal. e. the O Many of the children in the study sample entered foster care many years ago, which raises an important the process improved over time? In order to address this question, we examined three of the data indicators discussed of time from foster care entry to filing peti-tions, length of time from filing petitions to legal freeing, and length of time from foster care entry to legal determine if these time frames have gotten shorter over the years. As dis-cussed below and shown in Figures 9.24, 9.25, and 9.26, we found that the process has improved over time. However, the process of filing petitions and ultimately freeing children for adoption still takes many months or years to complete, which is also evident in Figures 9.24, 9.25, and 9.26 below and does not happen at all for some children, even though the law requires it. 258 First, we examined the relationship between the date the child entered foster care and the length of time from entry to filing of the first as to either parent (see Figure 9.24). Children who entered foster care more recently were significantly more likely to experience a shorter length of time between entry and the filing of the first petition than children who entered foster care less recently 259 Although this analysis does not control for other factors that might influence length of time from entry to filing, it does suggest that timeliness of filing has improved over time. Proportions do not total 100% due to rounding. because the data collection period ended on September 30, 2008, children entering foster care most recently (or children with filed most recently, depending on the analysis) are less likely to be included in these analyses, as they are less likely to have achieved the milestones in question, simply because they have had less time to achieve the milestones in question filing or becoming legally free). this correlation was statistically significant (p .001).4%19%21% 6%15% 11% of Children Length of 48+ months 36+ 48 36 24 18 12 than 6 months L y court 207 |Figure 9.24: Correlation Between Date Entered Foster Care and Months From Entry to Filing as to at least One Second, we examined the relationship between the date the first petition as to either parent was filed and the length of time it took from the filing of the first petition to legally freeing the child (see Figure 9.25). Children for whom petitions were filed more recently were significantly more likely to experience a shorter length of time between filing and freeing than children for whom petitions were filed less recently 261 Although this analysis does not control for other factors that might influence length of time from filing to freeing, it does suggest that the length of time from filing to freeing has gotten shorter over the years. Figure 9.25: Correlation Between Date Filed as to at least One Parent and Length of Time from Filing to Legal Freeing 262 n 6 7. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if they did not have a filed as to at least one parent or if the date the petition was filed as to either parent was unable to be determined. this correlation was statistically significant (p .001). n 3 7. children’s cases are excluded from this analysis if they were not legally free or if the date the petition was filed the date the child became legally free was unable to be determined. Months from Date Entered Foster Care to Date Filed Date Entered Foster 120 100 80 60 40 20 0160180 1/1/92 1/1/93 1/1/941/1/95 1/1/961/1/97 1/1/981/1/991/1/00 1/1/01 1/1/021/1/03 1/1/04 1/1/05 1/1/06 from Date Filed to Legal Freeing Date Filed as to at least One 100 80 60 40 20 0 1/1/98 1/1/99 1/1/00 1/1/09 1/1/08 1/1/01 1/1/02 1/1/03 1/1/04 1/1/05 1/1/06 1/1/07 208 L y court Finally we examined the relationship between the date the child entered foster care and the length of time from entry to freeing (see Figure 9.26). Children who entered foster care more recently were significantly more likely to experience a shorter length of time between entry and freeing than children who entered foster care less recently 263 Although this analysis does not control for other factors that might influence length of time from entry to freeing, it does suggest that the length of time from entry to freeing has gotten shorter over the years. Figure 9.26: Correlation Between Date Entered Foster Care and Length of Time from Entry to Legal Freeing 264 Although the timing of filing petitions and freeing children for adoption remain extremely de-layed and problematic, these three correlations indicate that there has been some improvement in the timeliness of these processes over time. As discussed earlier in this chapter, many factors affect how long it takes to complete the freeing pro- For example, foster care agencies frequently do not file petitions within 30 days of establish-ing the Adoption goal, as required, and adjournments frequently delay the process, as they delay Article 10 and Disposition Hearings. Stakeholders reported that the process is often delayed due to issues with serving peti-tions. When a petition is filed, the parents must be meaning a copy of the petition must be person-ally delivered to the parents. According to stakeholders, the process of serving petitions t his correlation was statistically significant (p .001). n 43. children’s cases were excluded from this analysis if they were not legally free or if the date they became legally free was unable to be ..a .part from Date Entered Foster Care to Legal Freeing Date Entered Foster 120 100 80 60 40 20 0160180 1/1/94 1/1/95 1/1/96 1/1/97 1/1/98 1/1/99 1/1/00 1/1/01 1/1/02 1/1/03 1/1/04 1/1/05 1/1/06 1/1/07 L y court 209 |is often delayed for weeks or even months. Additionally efforts (referred to as must be made to locate and serve parents whose whereabouts are unknown. Because years may have passed without any contact between the caseworker and the missing parent (frequently the father) or any efforts on the part of caseworker to locate the parent, this process can also take a considerable amount of time. These issues along with other issues discussed in this chapter, can impact how long it takes to move from filing a petition to freeing a child. e. OF P Al right S With 1. Termination Proceedings and Parents with Serious Mental Illness Cognitive Disabilities As noted in Chapter 4: Casework, a substantial minority of children in the study had parents who had a serious mental illness cognitive In addition to concerns about casework with and services for these families (described in Chapter 4: Casework), some stakeholders who participated in interviews and focus groups expressed concern that parents with serious mental illness cognitive disabilities may have their parental rights terminated solely and inappropriately based on these conditions. Of the 34 children whose mothers had a documented serious mental illness, 38% had a filed against the mother and 62% did not. Of the 18 children whose mothers had a documented cogni-tive disability 28% had a filed against the mother and 72% did not. The difference between the frequency of filing in cases involving a seriously mentally ill or cognitively disabled mother versus cases with mothers who did not have those conditions was not statistically significant. 266 However, these analyses should be viewed with caution because they are based on relatively small of mothers who have these conditions. It should be noted that data were not collected regarding whether mental illness or mental re- were in fact grounds for these particular filings. In other words, it is possible that mental illness or mental retardation were not stated grounds in these filings. In fact, as a general matter, petitions that include mental health and mental retardation allegations are relatively rare Data from the New Y City Family Court indicate that 7.7% of the 4,718 petitions filed from 2006 to 2008 included a mental health or mental retardation allegation. 267 Finally it should also be noted that even when parental mental illness or cognitive disability is a factor in a child welfare case, it may not be the defining issue. Assessments regarding whether parents with cognitive disabilities serious mental illness can parent must consider a variety of factors, includ-ing, but not limited to, the particular conditions and responsiveness to assistance treat-ment. Other risk factors and circumstances that may be related or unrelated to the cognitive disability or mental health condition, including the abuse and neglect that lead to the children entering foster care in the first place must also be considered. However, cases involving parents with cognitive disabilities serious mental illness can create an additional layer of complexity and require skilled individuals who can make qualified assessments and appropriate recommendations to foster care agen-cies and the Court. data were collected regarding documented serious mental illness and cognitive delay among the parents of children in the sample who were not legally free. t data were not collected for children who were legally free. data provided in this section are based on analyses of filings among children in the sample who were not legally free. data provided to children’s rights by the New y city f c a 2009. 210 L y court 2. Termination Proceedings and Incarcerated Parents Among children in the sample who were not legally free for adoption (106 children), 10% percent (11 children) had a parent who was incarcerated at some point during the review period. 268 The 11 children included three children whose mothers were incarcerated, seven children whose father was incarcerated, and one child whose mother and father were incarcerated. were filed against two of the mothers and three of the fathers. No were filed against the other two mothers and the other five fathers. In addition to the fact that only a small group of cases in the sample involved an incarcerated parent, the study did not collect information on the length or location of or the reason for these incar-ceration. Thus, meaningful analyses regarding case practice in this subset of cases, as specifically related to the incarceration, is not possible. However, attorneys expressed concerns about a lack of adequate efforts to work with incarcer-ated parents generally in the system. These stakeholders identified concerns regarding the foster care lack of adequate outreach and engagement of incarcerated parents in planning for their chil-dren. In addition, noted some basic bureaucratic issues that hinder partici-pation in court proceedings. For example, when correctional facilities do not receive adequate notice about a hearing, they may not produce inmates for foster court hearings. Some advocates in the child welfare community have also expressed concerns about the possible hasty termination of parental rights of incarcerated parents, noting that timelines require the filing of a petition when a child has been in foster care for 15 of the last 22 months, yet, for example, the median prison sentence for women in New Y is more than three years. 269 Based on these concerns, legislation has been introduced in New Y State that identifies a parent’s incarceration or participa-tion in a residential substance abuse program as possible compelling reasons not to file a petition within this time frame. The justification for the bill states that Y law almost always requires social services agencies to begin proceedings to terminate parental rights when a child has been in foster care for fifteen of the most recent months [emphasis 270 However, according to the most recent data available from at least among the general population (not specifically incarcerated parents), termination of parental rights petitions are rarely filed at 15/22 (and this comports with the findings from this study). Of 7,210 children who entered care between September 1, 2006 and August 31, 2007 and hit their 22nd month during FY 2009, only 17.3% had a petition filed. 271 However, these data pertain to the general foster care population (and also do not consider the existence of not to file). Data specific to filings pertain-ing to incarcerated parents is necessary in order to fully explore this issue. data were collected regarding documentation of incarceration among the parents of children in the sample who were not legally free. t data were not collected for children who were legally free. assembly bill retrieved 7, 2009 from assembly bill retrieved 7, 2009 from data provided to children’s rights by the a for children’s Services, a 24, 2009. L y court 211 |Vi. Some stakeholders suggested that attorneys should make more of an effort to meet to discuss the possi-bility of settling more cases, which could result in the legal process moving more quickly while provid-ing families with the services they need through agreement rather than court orders. Although this may take more time up front, in the long run it could save attorneys, judges and referees, and children and time it takes to litigate cases. Mediation is one option for reducing the length of time involved in litigating cases. Mediation is a process that brings the parties, caseworkers, and at- together outside of the courtroom in order to facilitate com-munication and resolve conflicts. In four of the five counties in New Y City the Family Court mediation process can be used to address a variety of issues that can prolong court proceedings and delay perma-nency for children, including determining the most appropriate perma-nency goal for a child, improving communication between a parent and a caseworker or developing a visit plan that works for the family the child, and the resource parent. 272 Mediation sessions are led by a trained facilitator and the process is set up to be confidential and An attorney can request that the judge or referee refer a case to the mediation program or a judge or referee can initiate the referral on his or her own. Currently mediation serves only approximately 250 families per year, 273 which, of course, represents a tiny fraction of the approximately 17,000 children that are in foster care on any given day Of the 153 children in the study sample, six of the children’s cases (4%) had been referred for mediation. These cases involved four children with a permanency goal of Return to Parent and two children with a permanency goal of Adoption (who were not legally free). Data were collected regarding the length of time from referral to beginning the mediation process, the length of time to complete the mediation process, and whether or not mediation resulted in an agreement between the parties; however, these are too small to report. as of the writing of this report, mediation was not available in Staten island. data provided to children’s rights by the New y city c alternative dispute r c June 24, t 