1 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF NEW YORK PRESENT: HON. X Plaintiff, -against- Defendant. --------------------------X Part: Index No.: ORDER OF REFERENCE TO MATRIMONIAL NEUTRAL EVALUATION PROGRAM 1. On consent of the parties, the following issues are hereby referred to the Neutral Evaluation Program and shall be conducted in accordance with the Program’s Statement of Procedures Issue(s) to be addressed at Neutral Evaluation: 4. At least five business days before the neutral evaluation session, counsel shall simultaneously exchange and submit to the Neutral Evaluator a concise, two -page summary of the issue presented, relevant facts and applicable law, if any. Counsel shall also submit (and exchange if not yet exchanged) a copy of client’s sworn statement of net worth. for the parties shall complete this form and, once it has been the court shall send it to the office by e-mail at subject line: Program Coordinator shall forward to counsel for the parties a Notice of Confirmation with a list of three Neutral Evaluators, from which counsel shall select one in accordance with the Program’s Statement of Procedures The parties shall appear at the initial session within 45 days of receiving the Notice of Confirmation. 2 5. The parties and their counsel agree that they shall comply with the Program’s Statement of Procedures, including the provisions regarding confidentiality and immunity. Parties counsel further understand and agree that no attorney -client relationship exists between the Neutral Evaluator and the parties, and that the Neutral Evaluator may not provide legal advice to the parties. 6. The attorneys for the parties herein are as follows: For Plaintiff: For Defendant: Address: Address: Phone: Phone: Email: Email: For Child: Address: Phone: Email: THIS SPACE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK CONTINUE TO PAGE 3 3 7. The parties shall appear for a status conference before the court on at Signature of Plaintiff Signature of Defendant Signature of Counsel for Plaintiff Signature of Counsel for Defendant Dated: New York, New York SO ORDERED: or Court Attorney -Referee 