1 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF x Plaintiff(s), PRESUMPTIVE STIPULATION AND ORDER OF REFERENCE -against Index No.: Date Filed: Defendant(s). x It is hereby stipulated by and between all parties to the within action as follows: 1. This action qualifies for Presumptive Alternative Dispute Resolution pursuant to the County Supreme Court Presumptive Alternative Dispute Resolution Program Rules and the parties request referral to Presumptive 2. The parties have selected the following Presumptive program: Mediation by a mediator from the Roster The parties have selected with an address at: and phone number plaintiff defendant has requested waiver of fees due to indigent status Private 3. The parties agree to be bound by the Civil Case Management Parts Rules and 9th Judicial District Rules 4. The first mediation session shall take place within thirty (30) days hereof. 2 [To be filled in by Court] Compliance Conference: for all parties shall appear at a compliance conference to report on the status of in the Compliance Part on The parties are reminded that Standard Goals expires on and shall not be extended due to the of presumptive 5. The following (to the extent available and applicable to the specific case type) shall be exchanged by the parties within three (3) weeks thereof with a copy of the same to the mediator: Insurance information, including insurance company and policy limits Lien information Bill(s) of Particulars Medical reports Appraisals history Pleadings and any prior court orders in matters not subject to Other 6. In matters referred to mediators from the Roster, the parties agree to remit payment, in the sum of $400.00 per hour, to be shared in equal parts by participating parties, for mediation sessions requested beyond the initial ninety (90) minute free mediation session, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the parties. Parties desiring to continue mediation beyond the initial session shall enter into a written agreement for payment of such fees with the mediator prior to the second session. Parties who are exempt from such fees due to indigent status shall not be responsible for any portion of the mediator’s fee. Subject to approval, mediators shall earn credit for time in mediation sessions involving indigent parties which would otherwise be 7. In matters referred to mediators from the Roster, within three 3) days hereof, Plaintiff shall serve the selected mediator with a copy of this Order and file proof of such service on 8. Any mediator selected by the parties who declines the reference must notify the parties and the Court of same within five (5) days of receipt of this Order. To avoid an appearance, the parties may select an alternate mediator and submit a proposed Amended Stipulation via with the name of the alternate mediator to the Court to be so -ordered. In the event that the parties cannot agree on an alternate mediator, Plaintiff shall request an immediate conference. The contents and provisions of the foregoing proposed stipulation are agreed to, and the parties request that the Court order same. 3 Dated: Attorneys for Plaintiff: Attorneys for Defendant: (Print Name) (Signature) (Print Name) (Signature) Mailing Address: Mailing Address: Number: Number: E-mail Address: E-mail Address: Attorneys pro party: Attorneys pro party: (Print Name) (Signature) (Print Name) (Signature) Mailing Address: Mailing Address: Number: Number: E-mail Address: E-mail Address: SO ORDERED: First conference scheduled before Court Attorney -Referee Room Teams on Indigent status has been granted to 