1 SUPREME COURT: THE STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF NASSAU Present: HON. Justice X Plaintiff, against Defendant. X 1. By Order of this Court on consent of the parties, this matter is hereby referred to the Matrimonial Mediation Program (the "Program") in accordance with the Program’s Statement of Procedures for mediation of any and all issues including issues that affect their relationships with their children and the financial well being o f all family members 2. Counsel if any, or the parties shall complete this form and, once it has been so ordered, the C shall send it to Cathy (the "Program Coordinator"), who can be reached at (516) 493 3424 or via e mail at 3. The Program Coordinator shall forward to the parties or counsel a Notice of Confirmation with a list of three randomly selected Mediators from the Court’s Matrimonial Mediator Panel from which the parties or counsel shall jointly select one in accordance with the Program's Procedures. If the parties or counsel cannot agree, each side shall have the right within five (5) business days to object to one of the Mediators listed in the Notice of Confirmation The remaining M shall serve as the Mediator Within five (5) business days, Counsel shall notify the Program Coordinator of the name of the Mediator selected and, within 72 hours thereafter, shall together contact the Mediator selected to schedule the first session. The Parties shall provide the selected Mediator with a copy of this Order of Reference. 4. The parties shall appear at the initial session within thirty (30 days of receiving a Notice of Confirmation. 5. No mediation of financial ancillary issues may occur without the exchange of a recent affidavit of net worth and the prior year’s tax returns with supporting W 1099, and K 1 forms, which if they have not been provided as required by 22 202.16 at the preliminary conference, mus t be completed and e five (5) business days prior to the mediation, unless waived. At least five business days before the mediation the parties shall send to the Mediator any information necessary for the effective negotiation of the issues involved, including but not limited the aforementioned documents. The Mediator may also request a conference call with the counsel regarding any preliminary matters and may request that the parties supply mediation summaries outlining each party’s goals. Index No.____________________ ORDER OF REFERENCE MATRIMONIAL MEDIATION PROGRAM 2 6. Within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the mediation session the Mediator shall email the of form to the Coordinator and to counsel for the parties. 7. By signing below, the parties and their counsel agree that the have reviewed and shall comply with the Program's Statement of Procedures including the provisions regarding confidentiality and immunity Parties counsel further understand and agree that no attorney client relationship exists between the Mediator and the parties, and that the Mediator may not provide legal advice to the parties. The Program Statement of Procedures and forms are available on the 10 JD Nassau County 8. The attorneys for the parties herein are as follows: For Plaintiff: For Defendant: Address: Address: Phone: Phone: Email: Email: For Child: Address: Phone: Email: 9. In cases where an Attorney for the Child has been appointed, mediation may proceed with or without the AFC present. An AFC shall not participate in mediation without having first communicated with his or her client. Any agreement reached by the par ties as to custody, visitation, or parenting time, as a result of the mediation, shall be reviewed by the AFC prior to being executed by the parties. 10. The parties shall appear for a before the Court on at AM PM 11. Participation in the Program will not stay the court proceedings in any way. Signature of Plaintiff Signature of Defendant Signature of Counsel for Plaintiff Signature of Counsel for Defendant Date:________________ SO ORDERED: New York 