Bronx County Supreme Court Contested Ma Che Title of Action: -vs- Index Once judgment has been granted orally by the court after trial or inquest, the following documents, in the exact order listed, must be presented personally or by mail to the Matrimonial Clerk’s Office, Room 217: of Issue with $30.00 fee (if not previously filed) copy of the court’s short form order permitting the late filing of the Note of Issue and waiving the Certificate of Readiness and service of Settlement of Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Judgment of service of Notice of Settlement, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Judgment of Fact and Conclusions of Law Certified Transcript of parties correcting any errors in transcript (if applicable) of Lateness with proof of service, if settled more than 60 days after inquest or decision after trial Statement of Removal of Barriers to Remarriage with Proof of Service affidavit must reflect that steps taken in accordance with 253(3) (If grounds are based on Separation Agreement and the defendant appears in the action, the Defendant must also submit a Sworn Statement of Removal of Barriers to Remarriage) of any stipulation(s) entered into between the parties. Stipulation contain statements or an Addendum containing the statements must be submitted. of any Family Court order which is to be continued of Summons With Notice or Summons (served with Verified Complaint), with proof of filing or copy of pleadings if pleadings were previously filed with court regarding social security numbers of parties and children, and prior surname of wife. Form Case Registry Filing Form of Dissolution of Marriage Form 2168 130 Certification (2) stamped envelopes 1. The Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Judgment must be submitted within 60 days of court’s direction to settle on notice. 2. A copy of the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, Judgment and Notice of Settlement must be served not less than five (5) days before settlement date if served personally or not less than ten (10) days before settlement date if served by mail. 3. If child support is to be paid through the Support Collection Unit, the Judgment must contain the Support Collection Unit Notice as required by and the judgment must reflect that support be paid through the Support Collection Unit at the following address: Child Support Processing Center P.O. Box 15363 Albany, N.Y. 12212-5363 4. Any counter Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and counter Judgment shall be made returnable on same date and place. 5. Any counter Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and counter Judgment shall be submitted with a copy clearly marked to delineate each proposed change to the Findings or Judgment to which objection is made. 6. Copy of counter papers shall be served not less than two (2) days before settlement date if served personally or not less than seven (7) days before settlement date if served by mail. 7. Notice Of Settlement, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Judgment must be filed with the Matrimonial Clerk on or before the return date. 8. The papers will be submitted to the court for consideration on the next business day following the settlement date. If the papers are acceptable to the court, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Judgment will be signed. Otherwise, further corrections may be required. 9. A certified copy of the final signed Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Judgment may be obtained from the County Clerk’s Office, Room 118, for a fee of $8.00 per certified copy. 