NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC May 4, 2020 Program for Electronic Deliver y of Documents In response to the -19 public health emergency and the expansion of virtual court operations, the Unified Court System has i ed a new program to transmit digitized documents (in format) to courts, County Clerks, and other court -related offices around the State. The Electronic Document Delivery System allows user s, in a single transaction, to (1) enter basic information about a matter on a portal page; (2) upload one or more documents and (3) send those documents electronically to a court or clerk selected by the user. Upon receipt of the d (s) by the court, the sender will receive an email notification together with a unique code that identifies the delivery. More detailed instructions for sending or filing documents through may be found on the FAQ page Users /Senders should keep several important points in mind when using this system: 1. May be Used to File Papers with Certain Court s: At the direction of the Chief Adm Judge, d the -19 public health crisis can be used to d r documents for filing with certain courts including some Family Court s, Criminal Court s, Supreme Court, the Court of Claims, Surrogate’s Courts, and District Courts, and City Courts is not available in the New York City Criminal Court.) To use the system for filing, the sender must simply check a box on the sender information screen complete the sending of the document(s) to the appropriate court through the ED system and pay any required filing fee by credit card The clerk’s office will review the document (s) for sufficiency and, if the clerk determines that filing prerequisites have been met accept the m for filing purposes. In the event that a clerk’s office has accepted and filed a document received through the sender will be notified of that fact by email or publication on a public database If no email or published notification is issued indicating that the document has been accepted for filing the sender should not assume that the filing has occurred The sender may contact the c office to inquire about the status of a proposed filing. 2. is Not a Substitute for E -filing or Please note that, although may be used for filing in various courts, it does not replace and may not substitute for filing under the New York State Courts Electronic Filing System Therefore, i t should not be used in matters where is available on either a mandatory or consensual basis. (Counties and case types where is available are listed on Authorized for E -Filing page. 3. Deliver y is not on Other Parties Finally, u delivery of a document through does not constitute service of the document on any other party If service is required, the sender must serve by some other means. In sum, is a document delivery portal that complements the electronic filing system and which, upon completion and together with will allow remote and immediate delivery of digitized documents throughout the Unified Court System. 