Dear If you have a case pending in Supreme Court, Division for the Seventh Judicial District this Court has a free Mediation Program that provides full mediation at no cost. The are conducted by Court Mediators Adrian J. Burke, Esq. and Amy L. Esq. Everything that takes place during the mediation is confidential. All at this time are taking place via computer conference technology, namely Microsoft Teams. If you are ultimately unable to resolve your matter in mediation, the case is simply restored to the Court’s calendar. Why Mediate? Mediation offers the following benefits: 1. Allows the parties to maintain control over the outcome of their claims 2. Improves satisfaction with the process 3. Saves money 4. Speeds settlement and resolution of litigation The Court system strongly encourages you to m your case at the earliest possible time. Court Mediation requires that all parties voluntarily consent to be referred to mediation. In addition to obtain a referral to mediation though an Order of Referral to Mediation entered by the assigned judge, we are now offering access to Court Mediation where the parties execute and file the attached Consent to Mediate. When the Consent is executed and filed, your case will be accepted into Court Mediation If a Consent is not filed, the case will remain with the assigned judge If all parties agree to try mediation, simply complete the attached Consent form upload it to and email it to and A Court Mediator will then contact you to proceed with the mediation. For more information, please contact Amy L. at or (585) 371-3680. SEVENTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT MEDIATION PROGRAM’S AGREEMENT TO MEDIATE VOLUNTARY CONSENT FORM Case Name: Index Number: County: 1. We have discussed with our respective clients and with opposing counsel the option to engage in the Court’s Mediation Program. 2. Our clients wish to engage in the Court’s Mediation Program at this time. 3. We request that this case be referred to the Se Judicial District’s Court Mediation Program 4. We understand that all Orders issued by this Court in this matter are hereby stayed pending mediation unless otherwise ordered by the Court. Counsel for Plaintiff Print and Sign: Firm Name: Address: Tel. No.: Email: Counsel for Defendant Print and Sign: Firm Name: Address: Tel. No.: Email: [ADD ADDITIONAL IF NECESSARY] Upload this form to and email it to and A Court Mediator will then contact you to proceed with the mediation. 