SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH COUNTY STATEMENT OF PROCEDURES PRES MATRIMONIAL MEDIATION PROGRAM PREAMBLE It is the policy of the Courts of this State, as set f in the State Chief Judge’s Excellence Initiative, to encourage the resolution of disputes and the early settlement of pending litigation through various settlement procedures. T he W County Supreme Court Matrimonial Part desires to use m as one m of settling disputes. T he benefits to the parties are m any, not only in a savings of time and money but also in prov a result in w all parties benefit. The follow Rules shall govern cases w q for Alternative Dispute Resolution through presumptive mediation and optional m T he Rules set f herein are intended to apply in the W Supreme Court Matrimonial Part. T Rules supplement and shall be applied in tandem with the Rules of the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program for the Ninth Judicial District (the JD Capitalized term s to the extent not def herein are as def in the Ninth JD Rules. Rule 1 Program: The W Supreme Court Matrimonial Part, em ploys the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program instituted by the Ninth Judicial District. Unless otherwise directed by the Court, cases ref erred to the Program shall be m A roster of private mediators has been established f or this purpose and, in addition, one Court Attorney Referee trained in m Cases w q for ref to the Program shall be those cases that have been designated by the Court as q for presumptive mediation, as identified in Rule 2 herein, as w ell as any cases w here all parties have elected to pursue m and any cases w here the Court has ex its discretion to ref er the cases to m Rule 2 Cases Qualify for Presumptive Mediation and Determination of Suitability Listed below are those cases w have been designated as q for presumptive mediation. All such cases shall be ref erred to m utilizing the procedures and f established by the Ninth JD Rules. T hose f enable parties their counsel to identify whether their case q for mediation. T he Court w ill review such f to confirm that the case does q in w event the m shall be initiated, and an Order of Reference issued in accordance w the Ninth JD Rules. T he follow cases are deem ed to q for presumptive mediation: MEDIATION 1. Matrimonial Actions w children 2. Matrimonial Actions w children and parents are W -2 em 3. Any case w here the parties request m FROM MEDIATION Matrimonial actions, involving allegations of domestic v cases involving child abuse or neg (as def in Family Court Act and (f and Social Services Law 412), domestic v or a severe pow er imbalance between the parties w here temporary or perm anent Orders of Protection have been issued are not appropriate f or ref to the Program. Cases w ill be screened to avoid inappropriate ref Rule 3. REFERRAL TO THE PROGRAM AND ONGOING LITIGATION: Cases m be ref erred to Mediation at any time including the prelim conference (w is typically when ref are m A party who attends the initial session com plies w the Order of Reference, even if that party ultimately chooses not to proceed w m Referral to the Program will not stay the court proceeding s in any respect. T he stay policy recognizes the special need f or prom pt action in m and f proceeding s. Full discovery, emergency and lite relief family dynamics, and the needs of children require ongoing access to the Court. Rule 4. Roster of Mediators and Compensation: The Adm e Judge for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and m a Roster of Mediators f or the Court (i) In order to be eligible to serve as a Mediator and be listed on the Roster, a person shall possess the f qualifications and such others as m hereafter be prom (a) A m m have com at least the amount and type of training required by Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief -2- Administrator; (b) have recent ex m divorce, custody visitation and equitable distribution cases, and any other m training or ex deem ed appropriate by the Court; and (c) com ply with the Ninth Judicial District’s Standards of Conduct f or Mediators. Cases involving financial issues will be referred only to those Mediators with knowledge of, training in and ex with financial aspects of divorce. Cases involving issues relating to for a child or parenting time with a child shall be referred only those Mediators with knowledge of, training in and ex with such issues. (ii) Continuing presence on the Roster is subject to rev by the Adm e Judge. Mediators m be rem from the Roster at the discretion of the Administrative Judge. (iii) The Roster w ill be av through the Court’s w (w otherwise directed by the Court, the Mediator shall be com in accordance w the Ninth JD Rules, including those prov allow for exemptions f parties having to pay for mediator com and those provisions allow for portions of the Mediator’s time to be non-com Rule 5. Procedure; Automatic Disclosures: (i) Unless otherwise directed by the Mediator, at least ten day s before the f mediation session, each party shall deliver to the Mediator a copy of that party marked pleading s (including responsive pleading s) together w a memorandum in the f set f in the Ninth JD Rules. Ex as otherwise agreed, this m shall not be served on the adv or filed in Court, shall be read only by the Mediator, and shall be destroy ed by the Mediator immediately upon com of the m (ii) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties and the Mediator, or as directed by the Mediator, w ten day s of the f of the Order of Reference pursuant to the Ninth JD Rules, the parties shall ex change information as specif in the Mediation Disclosure Protocols annex ed hereto as Schedule 1. Disclosure f or mediation purposes shall be consistent w the efficient resolution of the case. Unless otherwise directed by the Court or Mediator or agreed to by the parties, the covering information to be produced pursuant to the Mediation Disclosure Protocols shall be f the earliest date by which the statute of limitations on any claim asserted in the action beg an to accrue. -3- (iii) The Court Attorney Referees supervising discovery shall have the discretion to modify the deadlines f or initiation and com of the m process, including the discretion to limit required disclosure or to allow for additional disclosure bey that w is ex changed pursuant to the Mediation Disclosure Protocols prior to the initiation of the m process. Rule 6. Continuation of Mediation after Expiration of the Period: If the m has not been entirely resolved w the period as prov in the Ninth JD Rules, but the parties and the Mediator believe that it w be beneficial if the m process w ere to continue, the process m go forward, but in such event, there shall be no ex tension or stay of the proceeding s unless otherwise prov by the Ninth JD Rules or leave is g ranted by a Justice of the Court. Rule 7. Further Mediation: After com of the m or upon request of a party or upon its ow n initiative, the Court Attorney Referee or Supervising Justice, in his or her discretion, m issue an order directing a second ref to the Program. Any such ref shall be entertained and ordered as early as practicable and shall be administered in accordance w these and the Ninth JD Rules. Rule 8. A of Program: The Program shall be supervised and coordinated by the Rosemary Telephone: 914-824-5337 Em ail: who shall act as the Administrator f or the of f or that case. -4- Schedule 1 AL ACTIONS The parties shall ex change and provide the Mediator with the following documents: 1. A copy of their Statement of Net W 2. The three most recently filed F and State tax returns 3. Current salary information and pay checks 4. Current Deferred Compensation Statements 5. Any and all information related to the ownership, value, and equity of the marital residence. At any stage, the Mediator may request a party to submit additional information as the Mediator deems appropriate. -5- 