SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH QUEENS COUNTY MATRIMONIAL ME PRO GRAM Frequently Ask ed Questions Queens County Supreme Court’s Matrimonial Mediation Program offers a f initial session with a mediator to divorcing pa who already have c pending in Que ens County Supreme Court. Program media tors have significant training a experience in family mediation and in opening paths of communication that emphasize common gr and enc e cooper They help par ties to resolve key issues that affect their relationships wit h their children a the financial of all family members. Par ties are free to choose at the end of the fr 90- minute session whether the y wish to continue in mediation. What is Mediation? Mediation is a confidential, informal dispute re solution process in which a neutral third per son the mediator he divorcing parties to communicate and r each individually -tailored solutions to pare a economic disputes. Me allows the parties to e the discussion beyond disputed leg issues and to address the feeling s, needs, a values underlying the conflict. Media often results in a written agreement that can be incorporated into an Order or of Divorce Mediators do not decide who was right or wrong in the past or impose solutions. They do not evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of e par case, assess the likely court outcome or offer legal advice Instead, media tors help par ties focus on their r ed future and empower the par ties to make their own decisions that meet their unique needs and inter Please note that mediation is not appropriate where there is domestic violence or any sever e power imbalance that impacts an individual’s ability to express what is in his or her own be st interest. The presence of separate counsel for each party during mediation sessions is ex d and strong encouraged. Whether a in the me along side their clients or a clients outside of the media process, a s play a crucial role in informing pa of their legal rig and responsibilities and the consequence s of proposed solutions. What are t he Benefits of Mediation? Research shows that mediation settles a la per of c other wise headed for litigation, speeds settlement, saves money and increases compliance and satisfaction, with agreements. Most importantly mediation leads to improved r between pare and their children, as we ll as between divorce d pare even y ears after the settlement. Finally mediation leave parties no worse off parties are still free to go to trial if they cannot settle. What Happens in Mediation? Both parties have the opportunity to raise issues of concern and t o explain the facts of the dis as each person sees them. The mediator then asks questions to identify those parenting and economic issues that require discussion. Once the m and parties have identified the issues for discussion, the mediator helps the parties work collaboratively to explore and choose options that meet the pa needs. Although most information i s exchanged with every one at the table, there may come a time when either party the party counsel or the mediator suggests a caucus. During the caucus, the mediator meets individually with each party to explore how the parties view the dispute and the impact of any proposed solutions. The mediator doe s not share any information discussed in caucus without the disclosing pa per mission. If the parties agree to a parenting plan that resolves the issues of child custody visitation or financial issues, that agreement will be returned to the referring Justice for review. If approve d, the agreement may be incorporated in the court’s Order or Judgment of Divorce If the parties are unable to reach agreement on some or all of the issues, they return to c Who are the M The media tors on the Court’s Roster of Ne have successfully completed a minimum of six (60) hours of family mediation training have at least 4 years of family mediation experience including 250 hours of ace mediation with clients, and have mediated a minimum of 25 cases involving issues of c and visitation. Do I P for Mediation? Queens County Supreme Court’s Matrimonial Mediation Program offers a f initial session with a mediator. I f the pa schedule additional sessions, the mediator is entitled to a fee. The fee is neg between the pa and media tor, but shall be no more than $250 per hour. How is a Mediation Scheduled? Ask to be re to the Ma Mediation Program at any time that y appear in court. Once the court sends the par ties to mediation, the Program will provide the pa and their counsel the c information for the mediator For more information, please c the Program Coordinator a t or ca ll 718-298-1100. Robert Emery Divorce Media R a Reflections, Family Review, Vol. 43 No. 1 January 2005) pp. 22-37. Queens County Ma Mediation Program Fact Sheet The following provides basic information and is not meant to substitute for the full Statement of Procedures. You must have a divorce case pending in Queens Supreme Court. The Program provide s a mediation services for pare a economic issues in contested ma or case s.. Cases ca n be re e by the Court or on re quest of the pa There is only one attendance r Parties must participate in an initial mediation session. There is no fee to the me for this first session. If parties choose to continue w mediation after the first session, the mediator shall be entitled to compensation. I n no case shall the fee exceed $250 per hour. The Program itself imposes no fee The media tor is generally selected by the Program off ice. Par ties, however, are free to substitute a me of their choice within the guide lines set down in the Procedures The presence of counsel for ea ch par is ex d and strong encouraged. However, by agreement of the pa mediation may proceed in the absence of counsel unless other wise order ed by the court. Experience show s that party participation, as opposed to participation by counsel only both increases the likelihood of an a and enhances the satisfaction with it There fore, parties will par unless exempted by the mediator f or good cause shown. All communications in the mediation process are confide (with certain appropriate exceptions defined in the Statement of Procedures allegations of child abuse or neg I f mediation results in a written a signed by all parties, it will be submitted to the court for review. Firm deadlines g the Program. Media tors are selected within five business day s of referral of a matter to the Program. I sessions mus t be conducted within 20 day s of confirmation of the mediator. All sessions must be concluded within 75 day s. Other deadlines are noted in the Statement of Procedures. For additional information, please call the AD R Coordinator, Maria B y, Esq., at (718) 298- 1100, or send e -mail 