City Court Mediation Program 9th Judicial District STATEMENT OF PROCEDURES PREAMBLE It is the policy of the Court s of this State, as set forth in the State Chief Judge’s Excellence Initiative, to encourage the resolution of disputes and the early settlement of pending litigation through various settlement procedures The 9th JD City Court s desires to use mediation as one method of settling disputes. The benefits to the parties are many not only in a savings of time and money but also in providing a result in which all parties benefit. The follow Rules shall govern cases which qualify for Alternative Dispute Resolution through presumptive mediation and optional mediation. The Rules set forth herein are intended to apply in the 9th JD City Court s. These Rules supplement and shall be applied in tandem with the Rules of the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program for the Ninth Judicial District (the h JD Rules Capitalized terms to the extent not defined herein are as defined in the Ninth JD Rules Rule 1. Program: The 9th JD City Court s, employ s the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program instituted by the Ninth Judicial District. Unless otherwise directed by the Court cases referred to the Program shall be mediated. A roster of private mediators has been established for this purpose and, in addition, one Court Attorney Referee trained in mediation. Cases which qualify for referral to the Program shall be those cases that have been designated by the Court as qualifying for presumptive mediation, as identified in Rule 2 herein, as well as any cases where all parties have elected to pursue mediation, and any cases where the Court has exercised its discretion to refer the cases to mediation. Rule 2. Cases Qualifying for Presumptive Mediation and Deter of Suitability: Listed below are those cases which have been designated as qualifying for presumptive mediation. All such cases shall be referred to mediation utilizing the procedures and forms established by the Ninth JD Rules Those forms enable parties their counsel to identify whether their case qualifies for mediation. The Court will review such forms to confirm that the case does qualify, in which event the mediation shall be initiated, and an Order of Reference issued in accordance with the Ninth JD Rules The follow cases are deemed to qualify for presumptive mediation: (i) PRESUMPTIVE MEDIATION 1. Regular Civil Claims seeing money damages in excess of $6,000 2. Any case where the parties request mediation (ii) EXCLUSION FROM MEDIATION Actions involving allegations of domes tic violence or a severe power imbalance between the parties where temporary or permanent Orders of Protection have been issued are not appropriate for referral to the Program. Cases will be screened to avoid inappropriate referrals Rule 3. REFERRAL TO THE PROGRAM AND ONGOING LITIGATION: Cases may be referred to Mediation at anytime including the preliminary conference (which is typically when referrals are made). A party who attends the initial session complies with the Order of Reference, even if that party ultimately chooses not to proceed with mediation. Referral to the Program will not stay the court proceedings in any respect. The policy recognizes the special need for prompt action in city court proceedings Rule 4. Roster of Mediators and Com on: The Administrative Judge for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and maintain a Roster of Mediators for the City Court s (i) In order to be eligible to serve as a Mediator and be listed on the Roster, a person shall possess the follow qualifications and such others as may hereafter be promulgated: (a) A mediator must have completed at leas t 40 hours of civil mediation training in a training program recognized by the New York State Office of Court Administration );(b) Recent experience mediating actual cases in the subject area of the types of cases referred to them; (c) comply with the Ninth Judicial District’s Standards of Conduct for Mediators. (ii) Cont presence on the Roster is subject to review by the Administrative Judge. Mediators may be removed from the Roster at the discretion of the Administrative Judge. (iii) The Roster will be available through the Court’s website s otherwise directed by the Court the Mediator shall be compensated in accordance with the Ninth JD Rules including those provisions allow for exempt ions from parties having to pay for mediator compensation and those provisions allow for portions of the Mediator’s time to be able. Rule 5. Optional Mediation: In the discretion of the court and where available a referral to mediation shall be made to any of the follow (i) A mediation trained Court Attorney Referee or Judicial Hearing Officer (ii) A Community Dispute Resolution Cent er (iii) Private Mediator Rule 6. Disclosure s otherwise directed by the Mediator, at least ten days before the first mediation session, each party shall deliver to the Mediator a copy of that party’s mark ed pleadings (including responsive pleadings together with a ion memorandum in the form set forth in the Ninth JD Rules Except as otherwise agreed, this memorandum shall not be served on the adversary or filed in Court shall be read only by the Mediator, and shall be destroyed by the Mediator immediately upon completion of the mediation. s otherwise agreed by the parties and the Mediator, or as directed by the Mediator, within ten days of the filing of the Order of Reference pursuant to the Ninth JD Rules the parties shall exchange information as directed by the Mediator. Rule 7. Continuation of Mediation after Expiration of the Period: If the matter has not been entirely resolved within the period as provided in the Ninth JD Rules but the parties and the Mediator believe that it would be beneficial if the mediation process were to continue, the process may go forward, but in such event, there shall be no extension or stay of the proceedings unless otherwise provided by the Ninth JD Rules or leave is grant ed by a Judge of the Court Rule 8. Further Mediation: After completion of the mediation, or upon request of a party or upon its own initiative, the Judge, may issue an order directing a second referral to the Program. Any such referral shall be entertained and ordered as early as practicable and shall be administered in accordance with these and the Ninth JD Rules. Rule 9. Administration of Program: The Program shall be supervised and coordinated by the Chief Clerk of the City Court who shall act as the Administrator for the implement of for that case. 