SUPREME CO CIVIL BRANCH ESTER CO STATEMENT O F PRO MATRIMONIAL PART EARLY NEUTRAL EVALUATION PROGRAM I. OVERVIEW Neutral Evaluation is a confidential alternative dispute resolution process that m result in f aster, m ore convenient, less expensive, and less acrimonious settlement than might be the case in the norm course of litigation. In Neutral Evaluation, a neutral third party Neutral Evaluator hears abbreviated case presentations by the parties and counsel, provides an inf assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the arguments and m offer a non-binding opinion. Neutral Evaluators have significant experience in m law and specif training in Neutral Evaluation. Their assessments and opinions m help parties to analyze the case, f discussion, and generate a settlement. The Early Neutral Evaluation Program (the or the "Program offers parties access to qualified Neutral Evaluators who m the criteria set out in Section VI. The goal of the is to assist the parties and their counsel in reaching a resolution on a discrete issue or issues. Although parties are not obligated to settle in Neutral Evaluation, parties of ten resolve the discrete issue or issues ref erred to the Neutral. Parties shall attend the Neutral Evaluation session with their attorney s. Ref to the Program is not appropriate where only one party is represented by counsel, or in cases of domestic violence, child abuse, or severe power imbalance. II. DEFINITIONS "Neutral" shall ref er to Neutral Evaluators. "Neutral Evaluation" ref to a confidential, non-binding process in which a neutral third party (the Neutral Evaluator) with expertise in the subject m relating to the dispute provides an assessment of likely court outcomes to help parties reach a settlement. III. PROCEDURES The assigned Matrimonial Part Justice or the assigned court attorney -referee m 1 refer parties to the Program with their consent or the parties, on their own, m request referral to the Program Cases involving child abuse or neglect (as def in Family Court Act and (f and Social Services Law 412), domestic violence, or a severe power imbalance between the parties are not appropriate f or ref to the Program Cases will be screened to avoid inappropriate ref To begin the process, the court issues an Order of Reference on consent of the parties. The Order of Reference specif the discrete issue child custody visitation f issues, including equitable distribution, child support, s, and separate property to be submitted to the Program The Order shall direct parties and counsel to attend a f 90 m session with a Neutral Evaluator f the Program 's Roster of Neutrals. If parties wish to continue bey the initial ninety (90) m session, they may continue that session or schedule additional sessions. Neutrals shall be entitled to com f the parties at a rate that shall be $400 per hour, f the initial session. Pay shall be m in advance of scheduled sessions. See Section VII. The Order of Reference shall contain the control date set by the ref erring Justice or Referee f or the parties to appear in Court f or a conference f the Neutral Evaluation session. All pre-trial proceedings scheduled in the Prelim Conference order shall continue and shall not be stay ed pending the Neutral Evaluation. If all parties request, the ref erring Justice or Referee m agree to extend dates given the particular circumstances presented. In no event shall the date f or completion of discovery set in the Prelim Conference Order or the date f or the Com Conference be extended or adjourned by reason of the of the Neutral Evaluation. The Court shall deliver the Order of Reference to the parties who shall select a Neutral within f business day s of receipt of the Order. The parties m choose a Neutral Evaluator f the Court’s Roster of Neutrals or they may choose a Neutral who is not on the Court’s roster. If the parties cannot agree on a Neutral, they shall send parties shall not disclose who chose which Neutral. The parties shall confirm in advance that the two roster Neutrals (a) are available to take the case; (b) do not have a conflict of interest. The ref erring Justice shall then select one of the Neutrals and notify the parties prom of the selection. The parties are required to appear at the initial session within ten (10) day s of selecting the Neutral or receiving notification of the selection. The parties' counsel shall simultaneously exchange and submit to the Neutral Evaluator a concise, summary of the issue presented, relevant f acts, and applicable law, if any. The parties' 2 counsel shall also submit (and exchange if not y exchanged) copies of each client' s sworn statement of net worth. The f exchange and submissions shall be m so as to ensure that the Neutral Evaluator receives such submissions and statements of net worth at least f business day s before the scheduled Neutral Evaluation. The Neutral Evaluator m request limited, additional inf keeping in m ind the additional cost this m cause the respective parties. The Neutral Evaluator m further request a conference call with both attorney s regarding any prelim matters. The Neutral m give to the parties any agreements or m of understating generated at the sessions. Within f (5) business day s after the conclusion of the Neutral Evaluation session(s) which shall occur whenever after the initial session one party both parties, or the Neutral decides that the process has ended the Neutral shall send a Report of the to the Court and to counsel f or the parties stating: (1) the date of the initial session and whether each party and counsel appeared at the initial session; (2) the dates of any subsequent scheduled sessions, but not whether parties appeared; and (3) whether the parties reached partial, com or no agreement on the issues. The Neutral shall not disclose other inf discussed during Neutral Evaluation, except as described in Section IX. IV. ROLE OF THE NEUTRAL The Neutral Evaluator is an expert in the subject m of the issues ref erred who hears abbreviated case presentations and provides a non-binding assessment of the m of the respective claim s in an effort to f settlement. The Neutral Evaluator is not an advocate and m give an opinion as to likely court outcomes. At the parties' request, the Neutral Evaluator m also provide settlement assistance. At the initial session, the Neutral Evaluator shall explain that all com are confidential (with narrow exceptions outlined below) and will not be disclosed to the Justice hearing the case or in any other judicial or administrative proceeding. The Neutral Evaluator shall also explain that either party is free at any time to end the Neutral 3 Evaluation and return to Court. During the Neutral Evaluation, each party relates the f acts of the dispute and raises particular issues of concern. The Neutral Evaluator m ask the parties clarifying questions related to the issues submitted. If the parties reach a written agreement during Neutral Evaluation, the parties shall submit the agreement to their respective attorney s for review. V. THE ROLE OF PARTIES, COUNSEL, ATTORNEYS FOR THE CHILD AND GUARDIANS AD Experience has demonstrated that party participation as opposed to exclusive participation by counsel not only increases the likelihood of settlement, but also improves com with any term s and enhances the parties' satisfaction. Accordingly unless exempted by the Neutral f or good cause shown, the parties shall be present during the Neutral Evaluation session. The presence of counsel f or each party at all Neutral Evaluation sessions is required. For those cases in which an Attorney for the Child or g ad has been assigned, Neutral Evaluation may not commence without the appropriate Attorney or guardian’s presence, unless the parties agree otherwise. VI. THE ROSTER OF NEUTRALS The Program has assembled a Roster of Neutrals. Attorney s who wish to join the Roster m com ply with the f prerequisites: 1 Neutral Evaluators who wish to qualify for appointment to the Roster m have successfully com at least six hours of approved training in procedural and ethical m related to Neutral Evaluation and be: (1) Lawyers admitted to practice law f or at least f y ears who also have at least f y ears of substantial experience in the area of matrimonial law; or (2) Individuals who have served at least f y ears as a judge with 1 The train and qualifications guidelines for the Program are f Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge. See P art 146 at 4 substantial experience in the area of matrimonial law. Continuing Education: All Neutral Evaluators m attend at least six hours of additional approved training relevant to their respective practice areas every two years. Application to join the Roster shall be m to the Adm Judge and shall include a letter of interest with a description of the applicant' s credentials in the f prescribed by the Program The Adm Judge shall determine whether a person qualifies for inclusion on the Roster and whether a person seeking inclusion on the Roster has the requisite temperament, character, and discretion f or appointment. Continuing presence on the Roster is subject to review by the Adm Judge. Neutrals m be rem f the Roster at the discretion of the Adm Judge. VII. FEES The Program does not charge or administer f Parties referred to pursuant to this Statement of Procedures shall be required to compensate the Neutral for services rendered following the initial session and for time spent reviewing materials submitted by the parties for purposes of any subsequent sessions at a rate of $300.00 per hour. The fee arrangement with the Neutral must be agreed to in writing and must include the ratio at which the fee will be divided between the parties The parties must sign this fee agreement before commencing any sessions for which compensation is required. Sessions shall be paid for in advance. Neutrals are encouraged to work on a sliding scale to take into account the financial circumstances. VIII. IMMUNITY Neutrals serving in this program shall be immune from suit as a result of any conduct or om during the performance of duties in that capacity to the extent perm by law. IX. CONFIDENTIALITY Except as set f below, all oral, written, or other com m during the course of the Neutral Evaluation by any party Neutral Evaluator, or any other person present shall be confidential, and shall not be disclosed in any present or f judicial or administrative proceeding. Sim all inf generated in or in connection with the Neutral Evaluation including m work products or case f of a Neutral Evaluator shall rem confidential and not be subject to disclosure in any present or 5 future judicial or administrative proceeding. However, Neutral Evaluation shall not be used as a shield with respect to otherwise documents or inf produced or occurring prior to or outside of the Neutral Evaluation process. Moreover, except as set f below, nothing about the substance of the Neutral Evaluation, such as the weaknesses or strengths of the parties' cases or the relative willingness of parties to discuss settlement proposals, shall be revealed to the ref erring Justice, Referee, or any other person by the Neutral Evaluator or any party or attorney The parties shall report to the Court whether the issue or issues ref erred to the program have been "resolved" or "not resolved." If "resolved" the parties shall prepare and execute a stipulation f or submission to the Court on the discrete issue or issues which were resolved. Notwithstanding these confidentiality provisions, com and inf may be subject to disclosure in any present or f judicial or administrative proceeding in any of the f f circumstances: 1. Attendance Whether the parties and their counsel attended the initial session will be reported to the ref erring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee. 2. W Parties to the Neutral Evaluation and the Neutral Evaluator agree in writing to waive confidentiality The waiver m specif y the individual com or information that will be disclosed, the person or entity to whom the disclosure will be made, and the purpose of the disclosure. 3. W Agreement A writing signed by all the parties em body a negotiated agreement submitted to the court f or review. Additionally a limited report of the outcome, as explained in Section III, will be sent to the ref erring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee. Only those signed agreements that have become court orders m be admissible in any present or f judicial or administrative proceeding. 4. Threats of Imminent, Serious Harm If a com or inf constitutes a credible threat of serious and 6 imminent harm either to the speaker or another person or entity the appropriate authorities the potential victim may be notified. 5. Allegations of Child Abuse or Neglect The com or inf relates to an allegation of child abuse or neglect as def in Family Court Act and (f and Social Services Law 412 and f or which disclosure is required pursuant to Social Services Law 413. X. CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT If an allegation of child abuse or neglect is m by any party during the Neutral Evaluation, the Neutral Evaluator will safely stop the Neutral Evaluation process. Neutral Evaluators shall report to the ref erring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee allegations of child abuse or neglect f or which disclosure is required pursuant to Social Services Law 413. XI. DOMESTIC POWER IMBALANCE When an allegation of domestic violence or severe power imbalance is m by any party during the Neutral Evaluation, the Neutral Evaluator shall safely stop the Neutral Evaluation process, m with each party individually where appropriate to learn as m as possible about the circumstances as to whether to resume the process. Allegations of domestic violence shall not be disclosed to the ref erring Justice or Court Attorney Referee; instead, the Neutral Evaluator will give victim s information regarding their rights in the f prescribed in Family Court Act 812 (5). XII. REFERRAL TO THE PROGRAM AND ONGOING LITIGATION Cases m be ref erred to Neutral Evaluation on consent of the parties at any time, including at the prelim conference. Ref to the Program will not stay the court proceedings. The "no stay policy recognizes the special need f or prom pt action in matrimonial and f proceedings. Full discovery emergency and lite relief family dynamics, and the needs of children require ongoing access to the Court. XIII. AVOIDING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Before accepting a Neutral Evaluation, a Neutral Evaluator shall m an inquiry that is reasonable under the circumstances to determine whether there are any known f acts that a reasonable individual would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the Neutral 7 Evaluator, including a f or personal interest in the outcome, and an existing or past relationship with a party the party attorney s, or a f participant in the Neutral Evaluation. The Neutral Evaluator shall disclose any such known conflict to the parties and counsel as soon as possible before accepting a ref If the Neutral wishes to accept a ref after discovering a potentially disqualifying fact, the Neutral is obliged to disclose the disqualifying facts to the parties and, where such f acts exist, shall not serve unless the parties consent in writing. If a Neutral later learns of any disqualifying fact after accepting a case, the Neutral shall disclose it as soon as practicable. If unable to function in a f air and impartial m the Neutral shall seek disqualification and notify the Court. 8 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF PRESENT: HON. -----------------------------------------------------------------------X Plaintiff, Index No. ORDER OF REFERENCE against NEUTRAL EVALUATION Defendant. -----------------------------------------------------------------------X 1. On consent of the parties the following issues are hereby referred to the W County Supreme Court, Matrimonial Neutral Evaluation Program and shall be evaluated in accordance with the Program's Statement of Procedures: 2. Counsel for the parties have designated the following Neutral Evaluators from the Court' s Roster of Neutrals to be contacted by the parties in the following order of priority A.___________________ B.___________________ C.___________________ 3. The parties shall immediately contact the Neutral Evaluators to determine their availability in order of priority and shall schedule an initial session within ten (10) day s of this Order of Reference with the first available Neutral Evaluator. 4. Counsel for (Plaintiff Defendant) shall immediately forward this Order of Reference to the selected Neutral Evaluator. 5. W here financial issues are raised, at least five (5) business day s prior to the initial session, the shall send the Neutral Evaluator a copy of the pleading s, the Statements of Net Worth, Current Tax Returns and any other information necessary for the effective evaluation of the issues involved. 6. Please indicate whether any of the following matters are pending in this case: Motions sub Yes No_ Appeals: Yes _No Order(s) of protection: Yes No_ 9 7. By signing below the parties their counsel, agree that they shall com ply w the Statement of Procedures f or the Matrimonial Neutral Evaluation Program including those provisions regarding confidentiality and immunity. P their counsel f understand and agree that no relationship exists between the Neutral Evaluator and the parties, and that the Neutral Evaluator m not provide legal advice to the parties 8. The attorney s for the parties herein are as follows: For Plaintiff For Defendant:_______________________ Phone: Phone: 9. The parties shall appear for a status conference before this court on Signature of Counsel for Plaintiff Signature of Counsel for Defendant SO ORDERED: Dated: White Plains,, New York Supreme Court J Attorney Referee 10 