SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRAN CH QUEENS CO STATE OF PROCEDURE S MATRIMONIAL ME PRO GRAM I. OVERVIEW Mediation is a confide process in which a neutral third party the mediator helps disputing parties to identify issues, clarify perceptions, and explore options for a mutually acceptable outcome. Mediation often results in faster, less expensive, more durable, and less acrimonious outcomes t mi be the case in the normal course of litigation. The Queens County Supreme Court’s Matrimonial Mediation Program is open to those parties who already have a case pending before the court. When the parties appear in court, they may request the court to refer them to mediation or the court may order it on its own initiative. The program offers parties a free, initial session with a Program mediator. Program mediators have significant training and experience in family mediation and in opening paths of communication that enable meaning dialog and cooper They help divorcing parties to resolve key issues that affect their relationships with their children and the financial of all family members. Parties are encouraged, but are not require d, to bring their attorney s to the mediation session. Although parties are not obligated to reach agreement in mediation, the process often conclude s with a written agreement, as well as improved communication between the parties. If the parties reach an agreement during mediation, the mediator may assist the parties and their counsel in drafting a written agreement. The written agreement is then returned to the referring Justice for review. Subject to the referring Justice’s approval, the agreement will be incorporated in the Court’s Order or Judgment of Divorce II. P Supreme Court Judges may refer parties t o the M Mediation Program or parties on their own may request referral to the Program at any time. Cases involving order s of protection, child abuse or neglect (as defined in Family Court Act and (f) and Social Service s Law 412) and for which disclosure is require d pursuant to Social Service s Law 413, domestic violence, or a severe power imbalance between the parties are not appropriate for mediation and shall be excluded from the Program. Please note that parties may be screened by Court staff or the selected mediator at any time to deter mine eligibility for participation in the Matrimonial Mediation Program. 1 To begin the process, the Judge signs an Order of Refer directing parties and their counsel to appear at an initial, free, ninety (90) minute mediation session with a Program mediator selected from the Matrimonial Mediation Program’s Roster of Mediators. The Order of Reference may also contain a control date set by the refer ring Judge for the parties to appear in Court for a conference follow the m Counsel for the parties shall deliver the Order of Refer to Maria L Bradley, Esq., the Matrimonial Mediation Program Coordinator ("Coordinator" who is located in Administrative Chambers, Room 511, at 88-11 Blvd., Jamaica NY 11435, and who can be reached at 718-298-1100 or The Program Coordinator shall randomly select a mediator fr om the Court’s Roster of Media Within five (5) business days of receiving the Order of Refer the Program Coordinator shall notify the parties of the assigned mediator and send them a Notice of Confirmation, which shall contain the mediator’s name and contact information. The parties are free to select a differ mediator, but if they do so, they must notify the Program Coordinator of the substitution in writing w 5 business day s. It is the responsibility of the parties to contact the mediator within five (5) days of the date of the Notice of Confirmation to make the a for the mediation. The parties are required to appear at the initial mediation session within twenty (20) days of receiving a Notice of Confirmation. Parties shall complete all scheduled mediation sessions within seventy -five 75) day s of date of the Notice of Confirmation. At least one week before the initial mediation session, parties or their counsel shall send to the mediator a copy of the pleading s, Statements of Net Worth, and any other information necessary for the effective negotiation of the issues involved. The mediator may also request a conference call with the counsel re any preliminary matters. If parties wish to extend the m process beyond the initial session, they may schedule additional sessions with the mediator at a per hour rate that shall not exceed Program mediators are strong encouraged to work on a sliding scale to take into account the financial circumstances. Within five (5) business days after the mediation’s conclusion, which shall occur whenever after the initial session one party both parties, or the mediator decide s that the mediation has ended, the mediator shall send a Mediator’s Report to counsel and to the Coordinator but not to the ref erring Judge describing the outcome. The Report shall state (1) the date of the initial session and whether each party and counsel appeared at the initial session; (2) the dates of any subsequent schedule d sessions, but not whether parties appeared; and (3) whether the parties reached partial, complete, or no agreement on the issues. The mediator may attach to the Report any original, signed agreement and re turn it to the Coordinator. 2 Once counsel receives a copy of the Mediator’s Report, if the court has not already assigned a Control date, counsel shall promptly contact the Part of the assigned Judge to schedule a conference c f pr in the c The Program Coordinator shall report to the referring Judge whether the case settled (in whole or in part) but shall not reveal to the referring Judge the selected mediator’s identity or disclose other information discussed during the mediation, except as described in Sec I X. III. ROLE OF THE MEDIATOR The mediator’s primary role is to help the parties communicate and negotiate. The mediator does not give legal advice, predict likely court outcomes, or force solutions on the parties. At the initial mediation session, the mediator explains that all communications are confide (with narrow exceptions outlined below) and will not be disclosed to the Judge hearing the case or in any other judicial or administrative proceeding The mediator also explains that either party is free at the close of the initial session or at any time there after to end the mediation process and r to court. During the mediation process, all parties are free to discuss the case as they see it and to raise particular issues of concern that they would like to address. The mediator may ask the parties clarifying questions related to the care of their children, parenting time, and allocation of proper and income. The mediator then helps the parties to develop and choose options that meet the pa needs. At some point in the process, either party the party counsel, or the mediator may suggest a caucus. Caucuses are meetings that mediators hold separately with each side in a dispute. During the caucus, the mediator may explore how each party views the dispute and the impact of any proposed solutions. The mediator keeps confide the information discussed in caucus unless the party permits disclosure. If the parties reach a written agreement during mediation, the parties are strongly encouraged to submit the agreement to their respective attorneys for re view. IV. THE ROLE OF PARTIES, COUNSEL, ATTORNEYS FOR THE CHILD, and GUARDIAN S AD LITE M Experience has demonstrated that party participation as opposed to exclusive participation by counsel not only increases the likelihood of settlement, but also improves compliance with any terms and enhances the overall satisfaction with the process and outcome. Accordingly, unless exempted by the mediator for good cause shown, the parties must be present during the mediation. 3 The presence of separate counsel for each party during mediation sessions is encouraged. If counsel for either party is discharged or withdraws for any reason during the mediation process, the case may not proceed in mediation until a substitution occur s unless otherwise order ed by the Court. Without representation by counsel, parties risk enter into agreements with insufficient knowledge about financial, legal or other issues. If parties decide to participate in mediation without their attorneys present, they are strong advised to consult counsel before finalizing any agreement. For those cases in which an attorney for the child has been assigned, mediation may not commence without the child’s attorney present. If the parties and the child’s attorney agree to proceed in mediation without the child’s attorney they may do so, unless otherwise order ed by the Court. V. THE ROLE OF THE COURT The P is conducted under Court auspice s and pursuant to these rules. J and non-judicial staff are encouraged to inform the pa of the Program’s e The Program is open to those cases that are already ongoing in court. The Judge may refer the parties to mediation or the parties may request the J to re fer them. The Court welcome s the feedback of parties, counsel, and mediators after the conclusion of the proceeding s. VI. THE ROSTER OF M The Court has assembled a Roster of Mediators. The prerequisites to joining the Roster are as follows: Training Completion of at least 60 hours of family mediation training in a training program sponsored or r by the New York State Of of Court Administration ("O CA") Experience: At least four years of family mediation experience including 250 hours of face mediation with clients and a minimum of 25 custody and visitation cases, and any other mediation training or experience deemed appropriate by the Court. Cases involving financial disputes will be referred only to those Program mediators with knowledge of, training in and experience with the financial aspects of divorce Continuing Education: Pursuant to Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge, all mediators must attend at least six hours of additional approve d training relevant to their respective practice a ever y two y ears. For a full description of the require please refer to the Uniform Court System 4 website a t Continuing presence on the Court’s Roster of Mediators is subject to review by the District Administrative Judge. Mediators may be remove d from the Roster at the discretion of the Dis Administrative Judge in consult with the Unified Court System’s Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution and Court I Programs. VII. F The Program does not charge or administer fees. Parties referred to mediation pursuant to this Statement of Procedures shall not be require d to compensate the mediator for service s rendered before or during the initial mediation session. Should the parties agree to schedule additional sessions with the mediator, the mediator shall be entitled to compensation for service s rendered as follows: service s shall consist of time spent conducting any mediation session that follows the initial session, and time spent reviewing materials submitted by the parties for purposes of subsequent mediation sessions. The mediator’s fee for such service s shall not exceed $250.00 per hour. The fee arrangement must be agreed to in writing and must include the ratio at which the fee will be divided between the parties The parties must sign this fee agreement before commencing any additional sessions beyond the initial mediation session. Mediators are encouraged to use a sliding scale where appropriate, and shall consult with the Program Coordinator if the par ties are unable to pay for a sessions. VIII. IMMUNITY The mediator shall be immune from suit as a result of any conduct or omission during the performance of duties in that ca to the extent permitted by law. IX. Y Except as set forth below, all oral, written, or other communications made during the course of mediation by any party mediator or any other person present shall be immune from disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding Similarly, all information generated in or in connection with the work products or case files of a remain confide and not be subject to disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding. However, mediation will not be used as a shield with respect to otherwise discover able documents or information produce d or occur ring prior to or outside the media Moreover, except as set forth below, nothing about the substance of the mediation, such as the weaknesses or strengths of the cases or the relative willingness of parties to discuss settlement proposals, will be revealed to the referring Judge or any other person by the Mediator or any party or attorney Nor will any party or lawyer for a party reveal the outcome of the mediation process to the referring Judge or a member of the Judge’s staff unless both sides 5 agree to the disclosure. Notwithstanding these confide provisions, communications and information may be subject to disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding in any of the following five c s: Attendance Whether the parties and their counsel attended the initial mediation session will be reported to the Program Coordinator w ho may notify the Court. Waiver Parties to the mediation and the mediator agree in writing to waive confidentiality The waiver must specify the individual communication(s) or information that will be disclosed, the person or entity to whom the disclosure will be made and the purpose of the disc Written A A writing signed by all the parties embody a mediated agreement shall be submitted to the court for review. Additionally a limited report of the outcome will be sent to the refer ring Judge. Only those signed, mediated agreement s that have become court order s may be admissible in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding Threats of Imminent, S Harm If comm or information constitute a credible threat of serious and imminent harm, either to the speaker or another person or entity, the appropriate authorities the potential victim may be notified. Allegation s of Child Abuse or Neglect The communication or information relates to an allegation of child abuse or neglect as define d in Family Court Act and (f) and Social Services Law 412 and for which disclosure is re pursuant to Social Services L aw 413. X. CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT If an allegation of child abuse or neglect is made by any party during the mediation, the mediator will stop the m process and consult with each party individually for the purpose of obtaining as much information about the circumstances as possible. Mediators shall report to the Program Coordinator allegations of child abuse or neglect as define d in Family Court Act and (f) and Social Service s Law 412, and for which disclosure is require d pursuant to Social Service s Law 413. XI. DOMESTIC RE P IMBALANCE When an allegation of domestic violence or severe power imbalance is made by any party during the mediation, the mediator shall safely stop the mediation process, meet with each party 6 individually where appropriate to learn as much as possible about the circumstances, and consult with the P Coordinator (but not the assigned J or member s of that Judge’s staff) as to whether to resume the mediation process. Allegations of domestic vi will not be disclosed to the referring Judge; instead, victims will be given information regarding their rights in the form prescribed in Family Court Act 812 (5), and they will receive safety planning information. XII. ORDERS OF P N Those matters in which there are ongoing orders of protection shall not be referred to the Program. If an order of protection is issued during the course of the mediation sessions, the Mediator shall cease the mediation and c the Program Coordinator. XIII. REF TO TH E PR M AND ONGOING LITIGATION Cases may be referred to mediation upon request of the parties or at any time deemed appropriate by the Judge. A party who attends the initial session complies with the Order of Refer even if that party ultimately chooses not to proceed with mediation. Parties may move to opt out of the Program for good cause shown. Refer to mediation will not ordinarily stay the court proceeding s in any respect. The "no stay" policy recognizes the special need for prompt action in matrimonial and family proceeding s. Full discovery emergency and lite relief family dynamics, and the needs of children require ongoing access to the court, as a general rule. However, parties committed to the mediation process who conclude that additional time is require d to fully explore the issues pertaining to their case may request an adjournment. The Court, in the Order of Refer shall order as to whether court proceeding s, including discovery and motion practice, shall or shall not be stay ed pending the mediation process. XIV. AVOIDING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Before accepting a mediation, a mediator shall make an inquiry that is reasonable under the circumstances to deter mine whether there are any known facts that a reasonable individual would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the mediator, including a financial or persona l interest in the outcome, and an existing or past relationship with a mediation party or foreseeable participant in the mediation. The mediator shall disclose any such known fact to the mediation parties and counsel as soon as possible before accepting a mediation. The mediator is oblige d to disclose all potentially disqualify facts to the parties and, where such facts exist, shall not serve unless the parties consent in writing If a mediator later learns of any disqualify fact after accepting a mediation, the mediator shall disclose it as soon as practicable. If the mediator concludes that he or she is unable to function in a fair, impartial and objective manner the 7 The Coordinator ha s discretion to designate a media tor in appropriate ca shall notify the Program Coordinator a a new mediator will be selected. If, upon disclosure by the mediator of a potential conflict, a party objects to the assignment of the mediator, such party shall notify the Program Coordinator in writing within 5 days of the date of the Notice of Confirmation, on notice to the opposing party setting forth the basis of the objection. Within the discretion of the Program Coordinator, a new mediator may be selected. XV. F TO COMP WITH O OF REF AND THESE RULES If a party or counsel refuses to schedule an appearance for an initial mediation session in a timely manner appear at an initial schedule d session, or otherwise fails to comp with these rules, the Court may impose sanctions, including costs. Dated: Ma y 6, 2015 AL MEDIATION PROGRAM Supreme Court, Civil Term, Queens County Program Coordinator: Ma L Bradley Esq. Phone: 718-298-1100 Email: 8 