1 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF NASSAU ---------X Plaintiff (s), against Defendant (s). -----X 1) This case was referred to through the Nassau County Commercial Division’s Program (order of Justice dated 2) Pursuant to Rule 3 of the Nassau County Commercial Division Program’s Rules, located at the parties have conferred and have (CHECK APPROPRIATE BOX BELOW): Selected the following to serve as neutral Name Address Phone Email Are unable to agree on a neutral and submit the following four 4) names from which the Court may assign a neutral Name Name Phone Phone Email Email Name Name Phone Phone Email Email 3) For the neutral to run the required conflicts check, counsel for any corporate party must list here or on an attached sheet the names of all corporate parents, subsidiaries or affiliates: Index No. COMMERCIAL DIVISION INITIATION FORM 2 4) Please indicate whether there are Motions sub Yes No Appeals Yes No If you indicated yes to either of the foregoing, please contact the Court immediately. 5) The attorneys for the parties herein are as follows: Plaintiff Name Defendant Name Attorney Attorney Phone Phone Defendant Name Defendant Name Attorney Attorney Phone Phone 6) This form shall be completed and returned to the Court and the selected neutral within 5 business days from receipt of the Order of Reference. This deadline will not be extended. The initial session must be conducted within 45 days from the date of the Order of Reference (see Rule 3 [e]). At least one week before the initial session, each party shall deliver to the neutral a memorandum of not more than three pages (see Rule 3 [f]). 7) By signing below, the parties and their Counsel, certify that they have read and will comply with the Program Rules of the Nassau County Commercial Division. The parties and their Counsel further understand and agree that the process is confidential and that the neutral shall be immune from suit by any of the parties o r other participants in this case because of or based upon the neutral activities as such in this matter to the extent permitted by law. Parties agree that no attorney -client relationship exists between the neutral and the parties, and the neutral shall not provide legal services to the parties during the process. Counsel for Defendant Counsel for Plaintiff Counsel for Defendant Date: Counsel for Defendant 