Queens County Supreme Court Matrimonial Mediation P Mediator The Queens County Matrimonial Mediation Program offers mediation in cases referred by Justices of the Supreme Court. Those who wish to become mediators must (I) have successful completed a minimum of 40 hours of mediation training in an or recognized training program and (ii) meet the specific requirements of the L Program Rules. Please review Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge on Guidelines for Qualifications and Training of Neutrals Serving on Court Rosters, located at Mediators who join the Roster must be willing to conduct the first 90 minutes of mediation on a pro basis. Thereafter, the parties may make private arrangements with the mediator subject to Program Rules. Each applicant is requested to provide the information called for below and a resume. *The Matrimonial Mediator Affirmation of Compliance must accompany this application (available on the Queens Supreme Court, Civil Term, Alternative Dispute Resolution e.) 1. BASIC INFORMATION: Please your full name, firm or organization name, address phone and fax number and email address. 2. ADMISSIONS: Please list the year of your admission to the New State York Bar, and the names of any other jurisdictions or courts where you are admitted to practice and the year of admission. 3. EDUCATION: Please list all undergraduate, graduate, and legal or other degrees, educational institutions from which deg were earned, and the y ear y obtained the deg 1 Updated May 2017 4. MEDIATION EXP Please list all training programs in mediation that you have completed, including a description of the program basic mediation training matrimonial mediation training the number of hours of each course, and the entity that presented the program. Please state whet her you have been certified as a mediator and provide details. If you are currently serving as a mediator on a roster, please identify the court or organization where you serve. Please provide a reasonable estimate of the number of ions for which you have served as mediator and the number of involving custody 5. CONTINUING LEG AL EDUCATION: Please list all New York State programs that you have attended (with dates), on the subjects of Equitable Distribution, Maintenance, Child Support, Custody and Parenting Time Thank y very much for taking the time to complete this form and for y our interest in our Program. Please complete and send this form to Program Coordinator Maria Bradley Esq., at or by fax at 718-29 8-1099, or by mail, 88-11 Boulevard, 5th FL, Jamaica, New York 11435. 