Alternative Dispute Resolution Coordinator 100 Supreme Court Drive, New York 11501 Nassau Website: NASSAU COUNTY SUPREME COURT Civil Case Program Available to all civil cases that are not already included in a separate program within this District. Trial ready TORT cases (except medical malpractice) are particularly suitable for Program. Case should be referred only after sufficient discovery has been completed. Cases are mediated by Part 146 trained mediator from the Program’s Roster of Neutrals. Neutral’s assigned by the Court, will provide a free initial session. Compensation shall not exceed $450 per hour for mediation and preparation time beyond the initial session. Part Clerk must file executed Order of Reference with as document type Reference to Parties must file Program Assignment Form with within business 5 days of receipt of Order. Parties may elect to choose and pay for their own neutral or have a roster mediator assigned by Coordinator. Commercial Division Program Available to any commercial case regardless of amount in dispute. Cases shall be referred as early as is practicable by an Order of Reference to the Commercial Division Program Cases are mediated by a Part 146 trained mediator or neutral evaluator from the Program’s Roster of Neutrals. Neutral will provide a free 4 -hour initial session, 1 -hour can be applied to preparation time. Compensation shall not exceed $500 per hour for mediation and preparation t beyond the initial session. Mediator is generally selected by the parties. However, the Court will select the neutral if parties cannot agree and submit four names from the roster to the Court. Part Clerk must file executed Order of Reference with as document type -Reference to Parties must file Commercial Initiation Form within 5 business days of receipt of Order with Mediation Program Preferred for complex disputes requiring Court multiple sessions. Recommended for Medical Malpractice, Real Property, and disputes involving related parties. No cost for mediation and multiple sessions may be held in -person or virtually. Referring Judge should exercise discretion in making referrals to ensure that the case is ready and appropriate for mediation at the time of referral. Party contact information should be included on the referral order. Cases are mediated by select Judges, volunteer mediators or a Court Attorney. Court will assign the mediator on rotating basis based upon availability. Part Clerk must file executed referral order with as document type -Reference to Voluntary Private Mediation Parties may stipulate to use a private provider to facilitate resolution of their case at any time. The parties may negotiate a fee with their selected neutral. Private Mediators can be found through the Statewide Mediator Directory online at Some local private providers who may facilitate dispute resolution include: JAMS; The Jansen Group; Mediation Solutions; The Nassau County Bar Association Panels; NAM (National Arbitration and Mediation); Resolute Systems, and (Settlement Systems Arbitration Mediation). Providers may offer an initial session at a reduced rate for court ordered This list is for convenience only. The Court does not favor these prov over any other private Neutral or Provider and litigants are free choose any private entity. 