SUPR EME COURT, CIVIL BRAN CH 
QUEENS CO UNTY 
STATE MENT  OF PROCE DURE S 
MATR IMONIAL ME DIATION PRO GRAM 
I.  OVERVIEW
Mediation is a confide ntial, problem-solving  proce ss in which a neutral third party  — the
mediator —  helps disputing parties to identify  issues, clarify perceptions, and explore options
for a mutually  acceptable outcome.  Mediation often results  in faster, less expensive, more
durable, and less acrimonious outcomes t han mi ght be the case in the normal course  of litigation. 
The Quee ns County Supreme Court’s Matrimonial Mediation Prog ram is open to those
parties who already have a case pending  befor e the court.  When the parties appea r in court, they
may reque st the court to refer them to mediation or the court may order it on its own initiative. 
The program offers parties a free, 90-minute initial session with a Prog ram mediator.  Prog ram
mediators have signific ant training and experience  in family  mediation and in opening  paths of
communication that enable  meaning ful dialog ue and cooper ation. They  help divorcing parties to
resolve key issues that affect their relationships with their children and the financ ial well-be ing
of all family  members.  Parties are encour aged, but are not require d, to bring  their attorney s to
the mediation session. 
Although parties are not obliga ted to reach agreement in mediation, the proce ss often
conclude s with a written agreement, as well as improved communication between  the parties.  If
the parties reach an agreement during  mediation, the mediator may assist the parties and their
counsel in drafting a written agreement.  The written agreement is then returne d to the referring
Justice for revie w. Subject to the referring Justice’s approva l, the agreement will be incor porated
in the Court’s Orde r or Judgment of D ivorce . 
II.  P ROCEDURES
Supreme Court Judges may refer parties t o the M atrimonial Mediation Prog ram or parties
on their own may reque st referral to the Prog ram at any time.  Cases involving order s of
protec tion, child abuse or neglect (as defined in Family Court Act § 1012(e)  and (f) and Social
Service s Law § 412) and for which disclosure is require d pursuant to Social Service s Law § 413,
domestic violence, or a severe power  imbalance  betwee n the parties are not appropr iate for
mediation and shall be excluded from the Prog ram.  Please note that parties may be screened by
Court staff or the selec ted medi ator at any time to deter mine eligibilit y for participa tion in the
Matrimonial Mediation Prog ram.   
1
To begin the proce ss, the Judge signs an Orde r of Refer ence direc ting parties  and their
counsel to appea r at an initial, free, ninety  (90) minute mediation session with a Prog ram
mediator selec ted from the Matrimonial Mediation Prog ram’s Roster of Mediators.  The Order
of Refere nce may also contain a control date set by the refer ring Judge for the parties to
appear in Court for a conf erence follow ing the m ediation.  
Counsel for the parties shall deliver the Orde r of Refer ence to Maria L . Bradley, Esq., the
Matrim onial Mediation Prog ram Coordinator ("Coordinator" ), who is located in Administrative
Chambers, Room  511, at 88-11 Sutphin Blvd., Jamaica , NY 11435, and who can be reached at
718-298-1100 or mbradley @ny courts.g ov. The Prog ram Coordinator shall randomly  selec t a
mediator fr om the Court’s Roster of Media tors..1 
Within five (5) business days of receiving  the Orde r of Refer ence, the Prog ram
Coordinator shall notify  the parties of the assigned mediator and send them a Notice of
Confirmat ion, which shall contain the mediator’s name and contac t information.  The parties are
free to select a differ ent mediator, but if they do so, they must notify  the Prog ram Coordinator of
the substituti on in writing w ithin 5 busi ness day s.  
It is the responsibility  of the parties to contact the mediator within five (5) days of the
date of  the Notice of  Confirmation to make the a rrangements for  the mediation.
The parties are required to appea r at the initial mediation session within twenty  (20) days
of receiving  a Notice of Confirmation.  Parties shall complete all schedul ed mediation sessions
within seventy -five ( 75) day s of date of  the Notice of  Confirmation.
At least one week befor e the initial mediation session, parties or their counsel shall send
to the mediator a copy  of the pleading s, Statements of Net Worth, and any other information
necessary  for the effective negotiation of the issues involved.   The mediator may also reque st a
confe rence call with the parties’  counsel re garding  any preliminary  matters.
 If parties wish to extend the m ediation process beyond the initial 90-minute session, they
may schedule  additional sessions with the mediator at a per hour rate that shall not exceed
$250/hour. Prog ram mediators are strong ly encour aged to work on a sliding scale  to take into
account the parties’  financ ial circ umstances. 
 Within five (5) business  days after the mediation’s conclusion, which shall occur
whenever after the initial 90-minute session one party , both parties, or the mediator decide s that
the mediation  has ended, the mediator shall send a Mediator’ s Report to counsel and to the
Coordinator – but not to the ref erring Judge  – descr ibing the outc ome.  
The Report shall state (1) the date of the initial session and whether each party  and
counsel appe ared at the initial session; (2) the dates of any subsequent schedule d sessions, but
not whether  parties appea red; and (3) whether  the parties reached partial, complete, or no
agreement on the issues.  The mediator may attach to the Report any original, signed  agreement
and re turn it to the Coordinator.
2
Once  counsel receives a copy  of the Mediator’ s Report, if the court has not already
assig ned a Control date, counsel shall promptly  contac t the Part of the assig ned Judge to
schedule  a conf erence c oncer ning f urther pr oceedings in the c ase. 
The Prog ram Coordinator shall repor t to the referring Judge whether  the case settled (in
whole or in part) but shall not reveal to the referring Judge the selec ted mediator’s identity  or
disclose other infor mation discussed during  the mediation, except as de scribed in Sec tion I X.
 
III. ROLE  OF THE MEDIATO R
The mediator’s primary  role is to help the parties communicate and negotiate.  The
mediator does not give legal advice,  predic t likely  court outcomes, or force solutions on the
parties.  
At the initial mediation session, the mediator explains that all communications are
confide ntial (with narrow exceptions outlined below) and will not be disclosed to the Judge
hearing the case or in any other judicial or administrative proce eding .  The mediator also
explains that either party  is free at the close of the initial session or at any time there after to end
the mediation proc ess and r eturn to cour t.  
During the mediation proce ss, all parties are free to discuss the case as they see it and to
raise particula r issues of conce rn that they would like to addre ss.  The mediator may ask the
parties clarifying questions related to the care of their children, parenting time, and allocation of
proper ty and income.  The mediator then helps the parties to develop and choose options that
meet the pa rties’ ne eds.
At some point in the proce ss, either party , the party ’s counsel, or the mediator may
suggest a caucus.  Caucuses are meetings that mediators hold separ ately  with each side in a
dispute.  During the caucus, the mediator may explore how each party  views the dispute and the
impact of any proposed solutions.  The mediator keeps confide ntial the information discussed in
caucus unless the party  permits disclosure.  
If the parties reach a written agreement during  mediation, the parties are strongly
encour aged to submit the ag reement to their respe ctive attorne ys for re view. 
IV.    THE ROLE OF PARTIES, COUNSEL, ATTORNEYS FOR THE  CHILD, and
GUARDIAN S AD LITE M
Experie nce has demonstrated that party  participation — as opposed to exclusive
participa tion by counsel —  not only incre ases the likelihood of settlement, but also  improves
compliance  with any agreed-upon terms and enhanc es the parties’  overa ll satisfac tion with the
proce ss and outcome.  Accordingly, unless exempted by the mediator for good cause  shown, the
parties must be pre sent during  the mediation.  
3
The prese nce of separ ate counsel for each party  during  mediati on sessions is encour aged. 
If counsel for either party  is discharg ed or withdraws for any reason during  the mediation
proce ss, the case may not proce ed in mediation until a substitut ion occur s unless otherwise
order ed by  the Court.
Without representa tion by counsel, parties risk enter ing into agreements with insufficient 
knowledg e about financ ial, legal or other issues.  If parties decide to participa te in mediation
without their attorne ys prese nt, they are strong ly advised to consult counsel befor e finalizing any
agreement. 
For those cases in which an attorney  for the child has been assig ned, mediation may not
commence  without the child’s attorney  prese nt.  If the parties and the child’s attorney  agree to
proce ed in mediation without the child’s attorney , they may do so, unless otherwise order ed by
the Court.
V. THE ROL E OF THE COURT
The P rogram is conducte d under Court auspice s and pursuant to these rules.   J udicial and
non-judicial staff  are encour aged to inform the pa rties of the Prog ram’s e xistence. 
The Prog ram is open to those cases that are already ongoing in court.  The Judge may
refer the  parties to mediation or the  parties may  reque st the J udge to re fer them. 
The Court welcome s the feedback of parties, counsel, and mediators after the conclus ion
of the proc eeding s.   
VI.  THE ROS TER OF M EDIATORS 
The Court has assembled a Roster of Mediators.  The prerequisites to joining the Roster
are
as follows:
• Training : Completion of at least 60 hours of family  mediation training  in a training  program
sponsored or r ecognized by  the New  York State Of fice of Court Administration ("O CA") . 
• Experie nce: At least four years of family  mediation experience , including 250 hours of face-to-
face mediation with clients and a minimum  of 25 custody  and visitation cases, and any other
mediation training  or experience  deeme d appropr iate by the Court.  Cases involving financ ial
disputes will be referred only to those Prog ram mediators with knowledg e of, training in and
experience  with the financ ial aspec ts of divorce .
• Continui ng Educa tion: Pursuant to Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge, all
mediators must attend at least six hours of additional approve d training  relevant to their
respe ctive pra ctice a reas ever y two y ears.
 
For a full description of the require ments, please  refer to the Uniform Court System
4
website a t www.ny courts.g ov/rules/chief admin/146.shtml .
Continui ng prese nce on the Court’s Roster of Medi ators is subject to revie w by the
District Administrative Judge.  Mediators may be remove d from the Roster at the discretion of
the Dis trict Administrative Judge in consult ation with the NYS Unified Court System’s Offic e of
Alterna tive Dispute Resolution and Court I mprovement Prog rams.
VII.  F EES
The Prog ram does not charge or administer fees.  Parties referred to mediation pursuant
to this Statement of Proced ures shall not be require d to compensa te the mediator for service s
rende red befor e or during  the initial 90-minute mediation session.  Should the parties agree to
schedule  additional sessions with the medi ator, the mediator shall be entitled to compensa tion
for service s rende red as follows: compensa ble service s shall consist of time spent conducting
any mediation session that follows the initial 90-minute session, and time spent revie wing
materia ls submitt ed by  the parties for purp oses of subsequent mediation sessions. The mediator’s
fee for such service s shall not exceed  $250.00 per hour.  The fee arrangement must be agreed to
in writing , and must include the ratio at which the fee will be divided betwee n the parties .  The
parties  must sign this fee agreement  befor e commencing  any additional sessions beyond the
initial mediation session. 
Mediators are encour aged to use a sliding scale  wher e appropr iate, and shall consult with
the Prog ram Coordinator if  the par ties are  unable to pay  for a dditional sessions.  
 
VIII.  IMMUN ITY
The mediator shall be im mune from  suit as a result of any  conduct or omission during  the
performanc e of duties in that ca pacity  to the extent permitted by  law. 
IX. CONF IDENTIALIT Y
Except as set forth below, all oral, written, or other communications  made during the
course  of mediation by any party , mediator or any other person prese nt shall be immune from
disclosure in any prese nt or future judicial or administrative proce eding . Simi larly, all
information generated in or in connec tion with the mediation–including memoranda , work
products or case files of a mediator–shall rema in confide ntial and not be subject to disclosure in
any prese nt or future judicial or admini strative procee ding.  Howeve r, mediation will not be used
as a shield with respe ct to otherwise discover able documents or information produce d or
occur ring prior to or outside the media tion.  
Moreove r, except as set forth below, nothing about the substance of the mediation, such
as the weaknesses or streng ths of the parties’  cases or the relative willingness of parties to
discuss settlement proposals, will be revealed to the referr ing Judge or any other person by the
Mediator or any party  or attorney .  Nor will any party or lawy er for a party  reveal the outcome of
the mediation proce ss to the referring Judge or a member of the Judge’s staff unless both sides
5
agree to the disclosure.
Notwithstand ing these confide ntiality  provisions, communications and information may
be subject to disclosure in any prese nt or future judicial or administrative proce eding in any of
the following  five c ircumstance s:
Attendan ce
Whether  the parties and their counsel attended the initial mediation session will be
repor ted to the Prog ram Coordinator w ho may  notify  the Court.
Waiver
Parties to the mediation and the mediator agree in writing  to waive confidentiality .  The
waiver  must specify  the individual communication(s) or information that will be disclosed, the
person or  entity  to whom the disclosure will be made , and the pur pose of the disc losure.
Written A greement
A writing  signe d by all the parties embody ing a mediated agreement shall be submitted
to the court for review.  Additionally , a limited repor t of the outcome will be sent to the refer ring
Judge.  Only  those signe d, mediated agreement s that have become  court order s may be
admissible in any  prese nt or future  judicial or administrative proc eeding .
Threats of Im minent, S erious Harm
If comm unications or information constitute a credible threa t of serious and imminen t
harm, either to the speake r or another  person  or entity, the appropr iate authorities and/or the
potential victim may  be notified.
Allegation s of Chil d Abuse or Neglect
The communicat ion or information relates to an alleg ation of child abuse or neglect as
define d in Family Court Act § 1012(e)  and (f) and Social Services  Law § 412 and for which
disclosure is re quired pursua nt to Social Services L aw § 413.
X.  CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT
If an alleg ation  of child abuse or neglect is made by any party  during  the mediation, the
mediator will  stop the m ediation process and consult with each party individually  for the purpose
of obtaining as much information about the circumstances as possible.  Mediators shall repor t to
the Prog ram Coordinator alleg ations of child abuse or neglect as define d in Family Court Act §
1012(e)  and (f) and Social Service s Law § 412, and for which disclosure is require d pursuant to
Social Service s Law § 413. 
XI.  DOMESTIC VIOLE NCE/SEVE RE P OWER IMBALANCE
When an allega tion of domestic violence  or severe power imbalance is made by  any party
during the mediation, the mediator shall safely stop the mediation proce ss, meet with each party
6
individually  wher e appropr iate to learn as much  as possible about the circumstances, and consult
with the P rogram Coordinator (but not the assigned J udge or member s of that Judge’s staff) as to
whether  to resume the mediation proce ss.  Alleg ations of dom estic vi olence  will not be disclosed
to the referring Judge; instead, victims will be given information regarding  their rights in the
form presc ribed in Family Court Act § 812 (5), and they will receive safety planning
information.
XII. ORDERS OF P ROTECTIO N
Those matters in which there  are ongoing orders of protec tion shall not be referred to the
Prog ram.  If an order  of protec tion is issued during the course  of the mediation sessions, the
Mediator sha ll cease  the mediation and c ontact the Prog ram Coordinator.  
XIII.  REF ERRAL TO TH E PR OGRA M AND  ONGOING  LITIGATION
Cases  may be referred to mediation upon reque st of the parties or at any time deeme d
appropr iate by the Judge.  A party  who attends the initial session complies with the Orde r of
Refer ence, even if that party  ultimately  chooses not to proce ed with mediation.  Parties may
move to opt out of the Prog ram for  good cause  shown. 
Refer ral to mediation will not ordinarily  stay the court proce eding s in any respe ct.  The
"no stay" policy recognizes the specia l need for prompt action in matrimonial and family
proce eding s.  Full discovery , emer gency and pendente  lite relief , family  dynamics, and the needs
of children require  ongoing access to the court, as a general rule.  However, parties committed to
the mediation proce ss who conc lude that additional time is require d to fully explore the issues
pertaining to their case may reque st an adjournment. The Court, in the Orde r of Refer ence, shall
order  as to whether  court proce eding s, including discovery  and motion practice, shall or shall not
be stay ed pending  the mediation proc ess. 
XIV.  AVOIDING  CONF LICTS  OF INTERES T
Before accepting  a mediation, a mediator shall make an inquiry  that is reasonable under
the circumstances to deter mine whether  there  are any known facts that a reasonable individual
would consider likely  to affect the impartiality  of the mediator, including a financ ial or persona l
interest in the outcome, and an existing or past relationship with a mediation party  or foreseeable
participa nt in the mediat ion. The mediator shall disclose any such known fact to the mediation
parties and counsel as soon as possible befor e accepting a mediation.  The mediator is oblige d to
disclose all potentially  disqualify ing facts to the parties and, wher e such facts exist, shall not
serve  unless the parties consent  in writing .  If a mediator later learns of any disqualify ing fact
after accepting  a mediati on, the mediator shall disclose it as soon as practicable.  If the mediator
concludes  that he or she is unable to function in a fair, impartial and objective manner , the
7
..
The Coordinator ha s discretion to desig nate a nother media tor in appropr iate ca ses.1mediator shall notify  the Prog ram Coordinator a nd a new  mediator will be sele cted.
If, upon disclosure by the medi ator of a potential conflict, a party  objects to the
assig nment of the mediato r, such party  shall notify  the Prog ram Coordinator in writing  within 5
days of the date of the Notice of Confirmation, on notice to the opposing party , setting forth the
basis of the objection.  Within the di scretion of the Program Coordinator, a new mediator may  be
selec ted.  
XV.  F AILURE TO COMP LY WITH O RDER OF  REF ERENCE AND THES E RULES
If a party  or counsel refuses to schedule  an appea rance for an initial mediation session in
a timely  manner , appea r at an initial schedule d session, or otherwise fails to comp ly with these
rules, the Court may  impose sanctions, including  costs.
Dated: Ma y 6, 2015
MATRI MONI AL MEDI ATION PROGRAM
Supreme Court, Civil Term, Quee ns County
Prog ram Coordinator: Ma ria L . Bradley , Esq.
Phone: 718-298-1100
Email: mbradley @ny courts.g ov
8