9th Judicial Dist rict Permanency Med iation Program
The 9th Judicial District Child Permanency  Mediation Prog ram will promote collaborative
planning  in selected child welfare matters, throug h mediation between any  parties or interested
persons in a child welfare matter which may  include: the local departments of Social Services,
the respondent parents or careg ivers, their advocates and families, the attorney  for the child(ren),
foster parents or service providers.
The F amily  Court Act specifically  authoriz es the Court to make referrals to mediation at any
point in a child protective proceeding  to advance permanency  planning  for subject children1. The
mediation prog ram provides a forum where participants, including  extended family  and any
other important people in the child’s life, can work tog ether in a non-adversarial setting  to create
a plan that will provide the best outcome for the subject child or children.  I n mediation, the
participants discuss and define issues, ex plore options and find mutually  acceptable solutions. 
The process provides participants an opportunity  to 1) develop a plan for ensuring  safety  for the
child; 2) ex plore and plan for services to meet the child' s phy sical, mental, educational and
emotional needs; 3) discuss steps that can be taken to preserve and streng then the family ; and 4)
discuss permanency  plans.  I n addition, mediation provides an avenue for individuals involved in
a case to resolve conflicts among  themselves (whether between family  members or between the
parties and the workers) so that they  are able to focus on achieving  the best outcome for the
child(ren).
II. DE FINIT IONS
As used herein, “mediation” shall describe a consensual dispute resolution process in which a
specially  trained neutral third party  helps disputants to identify  issues, clarify  perceptions and
explore options for a mutually  acceptable outcome. I n general, mediators do not offer their own
opinions reg arding  likely  court outcomes or the merits of the case. I nstead, mediators offer the
opportunity  to ex pand the settlement discussion bey ond the leg al issues in dispute and focus on
developing  creative solutions, which emphasiz e the parties'  practical concerns.
As used herein, “participants” may  include the following :
•  The local department of social services caseworker, and supervisor, and attorney ;  
•  Respondent parent(s) and their attorney (s);
• The attorney  for the child(ren) ;
• The subject child(ren) where appropriate, with the consent of his/her attorney ;
• Foster parent(s) where appropriate; and Service providers, relatives or others who may
have a stake in the case or who can be a resource to support permanency  planning
where appropriate.
1 Article 1 0, §1018
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019
III. P OLICIE S AND PRO CEDURE S
1.  CO NFIDE NTIALITY
Section A: Confidentiality  Provision
1.Except as otherwise ex pressly  provided herein, all writing  relating  to the subject
or process of a mediation including  memoranda, work products or case files of a
mediator is confidential.  All information disclosed during  mediation is
confidential and shall not be subject to disclosure in any  judicial or administrative
proceeding .  All communications whether in writing , verbally  or by  other means,
made during  the course of mediation or in reference to the substance of mediation
by any party , mediator or any  other person present are confidential and shall not
be subject to disclosure in any  judicial or administrative proceeding .
Section B : Exceptions to Confidentiality
1. Notwithstanding  the confidentiality  provisions set forth in Section A,
information or communications may  be subject to disclosure in any  judicial or
administrative proceeding  in the following  circumstances:
(a)All parties to the mediation and the mediator ag ree to waive
confidentiality .  The waiver shall specify  the individual communication(s)
or information that will be disclosed, the person or entity  to whom the
disclosure will be made, and the purpose of the disclosure or,
(b)The communication or information relates to new alleg ation(s) of child
abuse or neg lect as defined by  law which must be reported pursuant to
Social Service L aw §413 or,
c)The communication or information constitutes a credible threat of serious
and imminent harm, either to the speaker or to another person or entity , in
which case the appropriate authorities and/or potential victim may  also be
notified.
2.A written ag reement may  be submitted to the court for review.  Only  those
mediated ag reements which are reviewed by  and incorporated into an Order of the
court may  be admissible in any  judicial or administrative proceeding .
2.  REF ERRAL P ROCESS
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019
Referral to mediation may  be made by  the Court, either on its own initiative or at the request of
any person involved in the proceeding . Referrals may  be made at any  point during  the case
where the Court believes an in-depth discussion mig ht lead to a resolution of a particular issue or
of the case as a whole. 
Upon determining  to refer the case to mediation, the Court will: 
a.Select a date for the mediation session and a location within the courthouse,
with all the parties present.  Attendance at this introductory  session is
mandatory .  
b.The date selected should be at least three weeks away  to permit case
development and to facilitate the appearance of necessary  participants (eg . 
supervisory  staff and foster parents).  Two hours should be allocated for the
mediation session.
c.Provide the parties with information reg arding  the 9th District Permanency
Mediation prog ram (such information to be provided to the Court by  the Child
Welfare Court I mprovement Office).
d.Fill out the referral sheet indicating  the issues or areas to be addressed in
mediation and email it to the Project Manag er.
e.Provide the mediation prog ram staff access to the petition, the fact-finding
order (if completed), the dispositional order (if completed) and any  reports or
information the Court deems pertinent.
3.  INTAK E AND CASE DEVELOP MENT P ROCESS
After receiving  a referral from the Court, the mediators will provide information desig ned to
help parties make an informed choice as to whether or not they  wish to participate in mediation. 
Such information will be provided in printed materials as well as in pre-session contacts between
the mediators and the parties and in the mediators’ presentation at the initial session.
The mediators will:
a.Review referral sheet indicating  the issues or areas to be addressed in mediation.
b.Contact all the participants starting  with the caseworker and then the attorney s
and, with their permission, their clients. Other individuals whose participation
would assist in the mediation who may  be identified by  the parties may
participate only  by mutual consent of all the parties and the mediators.
c.Contact the attorney  for the child(ren).  Children will be permitted to participate
in mediation in consultation with, and only  on consent of their attorney .
d.In these conversations, the mediators will ex plain how mediation works, answer
questions and beg in to develop relationships with the individuals in th e case. 
During  case development, the mediators help the participants identify  their own
concerns and clarify  what they  perceive as problems to be addressed by  the g roup.
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019
e.Determine if conditions are present that mig ht make mediation inappropriate.   An
example of such a condition would be a history  of violence or coercion between
or among  people who would be present at the mediation. I f the mediator
determines that the matter is inappropriate for mediation based on a confidential
communication, the mediator will refer the matter back to the Court, indicating
only that mediation was not appropriate.
4. INITIAL MEDIATION SESSION
The initial mediation session will beg in with the mediator reviewing  with the parties information
desig ned to ensure informed participation and decision-making .  The mediator will present an
overview of the mediation process, ex plain its confidential nature and the limits of such
confidentiality .  The mediator will also ex plain that participation in the mediation process is
voluntary  and that ag reements can be reached only  by mutual consent of the participants.
Following  an initial ex planation of the mediation process, the mediation will commence upon
written consent of the parties.  Should any  party  not consent, the prog ram will refer the matter
back to Court, indicating  only  that mediation was not initiated.
5. THE MEDIATION P ROCESS
The mediation process ty pically  involves the following  stages:
a)Exchang e of information;
b)Identification and clarification of issues;
c)Generating  options for resolution;
d)Analy zing options and selecting  among  them; and
e)Developing  a written ag reement (or ending  the session without ag reement).
These stag es can be completed in one session or may  span multiple sessions. W hen the
participants speak different lang uages, court-certified interpreters will be assig ned by  the Court
to translate at the mediation session.
The mediation process may  include sessions with the whole g roup and also sessions where the
mediators meet with smaller sub-g roups or with individuals (caucuses).  Since mediators are
neither decision-makers nor advocates, and since all conversations are confidential (with the
safety  exceptions noted above), mediators may  meet in caucus with individuals or with sub-
groups of the participants with no issue of ex -parte communication. 
Thus, discussions can be tailored to meet the needs of individuals (eg . children who want to be
part of the mediation but are not comfortable facing  the larg e group) or to address specific
situations (eg . a problem in the relationship between foster and birth parent that is preventing
visitation).  Participants can determine whose presence is necessary  to address a particular issue
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019
and sessions are structured so that attorney s can participate in the most effective and efficient
way possible.
All participants in the mediation must be in ag reement for a particular issue to be resolved. 
Written ag reements listing  all issues resolved will be reviewed and verbally  approved by  all
participants at the end of the mediation session prior to submission to the Court.   Copies of the
mediation ag reement will be distributed to all participants.
On occasion, there may  be an interim ag reement between mediation sessions which the parties
may choose to submit to the Court.  After each session, a status report will be submitted to Court
stating  the date of the nex t mediation session or if the case has been closed.  I t may  also contain
any other information which all the parties decide to report to the Court.
6. MEDIATORS
Section A: Qualifications, Training  and Ex perience:
The New York State Unified Court Sy stem shall maintain county  rosters of Consultant
Mediators to mediate child abuse and neg lect matters pending  before the F amily Courts
in the Ninth J udicial District (Orang e, Dutchess, Putnam, Rockland and W estchester
Counties). The prog ram shall operate pursuant to the Rules of the Chief Administrative
Judge (§146).
Appointment to the rosters is at the discretion of the Administrative J udge of the Ninth 
Judicial District who, in consultation with the Coordinator of the NYS Child W elfare
Court I mprovement Prog ram, shall review applications and make recommendations
regarding  appointment.  Applicants may  be requested to complete additional training  or
experiential requirements prior to admission to the roster if the applicant’s mediation
training  and ex perience does not fully  prepare them for Consultant Mediator status.
Minimum Requirements for appointment to the roster include completion of 24 hours of
training  in basic mediation skills and an additional 16 hours of specific training  on
mediation of child welfare (abuse and neg lect issues).  Applicants must also document
substantial recent ex perience mediating  actual cases, preferably  family  matters. 
Substantial recent ex perience is defined as at least 20 mediation cases conducted as either
a solo or co-mediator within the last 3 y ears. Consultant Mediators without prior
permanency mediation experience will be scheduled to co-mediate with an experienced
mentor until the Program Administrator determines that they are prepared to solo mediate.
Individuals that have completed the training requirement, but who don’t meet the experiential
requirement may be admitted to the roster as an unpaid apprentice mediator.  To attain paid
Consultant Mediator status, an apprentice must conduct 20 mediation sessions as a co-
mediator under the mentorship of a Consultant Mediator or otherwise document that the
experiential requirement has been met and be recommended for admission by the review
committee. 
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019
Roster members must attend a minimum of six hours of additional approved training relevant
to child welfare mediation practice every two years to remain on the roster.
Section B : Ethics/Standards of Conduct
Mediators will adhere to the following  standards, including , but not limited to:
a.Meet the practice and ethical standards of applicable codes of ethics g overning
their profession.  Maintain objectivity  and control for bias during  all mediation
sessions.
b.Protect the confidentiality  of all parties.  This includes not releasing  information
or making  recommendation about the case to the Court or any  individual, ex cept
as compelled by  statute.  L imitations to confidentiality  will be clearly  explained
to all mediation participants before sessions beg in.
c.Decline to provide leg al advice and not knowing ly assist parties in reaching  an
agreement that would be unenforceable for reasons such as fraud, duress,
illegality or the ag reement being  unconscionable.
d.Consider the health, safety , welfare and best interest of the child in all phases of
the process.
e.Disclose to the court, any  participant and his/her attorney  any conflicts or
interests or dual relationships.  Operate within the limits of his/her training  and
experience and disclose limitations or bias that would affect the mediation. 
f.Terminate any  session in which issues of coercion, inability  to participate, lack of
intention to resolve the issues at hand or phy sical or emotional abuse during  the
mediation sessions are involved.
Section C: Mediator Pay ment
Consultant Mediators will be paid $75 per hour.  Billable time will include case development
activities, actual time spent in mediation sessions, and post-mediation agreement and
paperwork preparation time.  Travel time is not a billable expense. Mediators may bill up to
ten (10) hours for each case referred. Additional hours beyond ten (10) will not be
reimbursed unless pre-approved by the Program Administrator.  If a scheduled mediation
session cannot be held because a required party fails to show or for other good cause the
Consultant Mediator may be paid for one hour for that session.  Such payment is at the
discretion of the Program Administrator. Reasonable travel reimbursement for mileage and
tolls will be made for mediators traveling more than 35 miles from their home. Any travel
over 100 miles must be pre-approved by the Program Administrator.
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019
9th Judicial Dist rict Permanency Med iation Program
It is expressly understood and accepted that the 9th District Permanency Mediation
Program protocol is not an employment agreement and as such the Consultant will have
no claim to Unified Court System benefits or employee considerations.
The Consultant agrees to take full responsibility for declaration of income for tax
purposes and for the payment thereof.
SIGNATURE (Consultant)
DATE               
9th District P ermanency Med iation Program Protocol 5/2019