NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC  
May 4, 2020  
 
EDDS: UCS Program for Electronic Deliver y of Documents  
In response to the COVID -19 public health emergency and the expansion of “ virtual ” court operations, 
the Unified Court System has i nitiat ed a new program to transmit digitized  documents (in pdf format) to UCS 
courts, County Clerks, and other court -related offices around the State.  The Electronic Document Delivery 
System (“EDDS”) allows  user s, in a single transaction,  to (1) enter basic information about a matter on a UCS 
webpage portal  page;  (2) upload one or more  pdf documents ;  and (3) send those documents electronically to a 
court or clerk selected by the user.   Upon receipt of the d ocument (s) by the court, the sender will receive an 
email notification , together with a unique code that identifies the delivery.   More detailed instructions for 
sending or filing documents through EDDS may be found on the EDDS FAQ  page . 
Users /Senders  should keep several important points in mind when using this system:   
1. EDDS  May  be Used to File Papers with Certain Court s:   At the direction of the Chief 
Adm inistrative Judge, d uring the COVID -19 public health crisis EDDS can be used to d elive r 
documents for filing with certain courts — including some  Family Court s, Criminal Court s, 
Supreme Court, the Court of Claims, Surrogate’s Courts, and District Courts, and  City Courts .  
(EDDS is not available in the New York City Criminal Court.)    
To use the system for filing, the sender must simply check a box on the sender 
information  screen , complete the sending of the document(s) to the appropriate court  through 
the ED DS system , and pay any required filing fee by credit card .  The clerk’s office will review the 
document (s) for sufficiency  and, if the clerk determines that filing prerequisites  have been met , 
accept the m for filing purposes.  In the event that a clerk’s office has accepted and filed a 
document received through EDDS, the sender will be notified of that fact by email  or publication 
on a public database .  If no email or published notification is issued indicat ing that  the document  
has been accepted for filing , the sender should not assume that the filing has occurred .  The 
sender may contact the c lerk’s office to inquire about the status of a proposed filing.  
2. EDDS is Not a Substitute for E -filing or NYSCEF :  Please note that, al though EDDS may be 
used for filing in various courts, it does not replace and may not substitute for filing under the 
New York State Courts Electronic Filing System (NYSCEF).  Therefore, i t should not be used in 
matters where NYSCEF is available on either a mandatory or consensual basis.  (Counties and 
case types where NYSCEF is available are listed  on NYSCEF’s Authorized for E -Filing  page. ) 
3. EDDS Deliver y is not “Service”  on Other Parties :  Finally, u nlike NYSCEF, delivery of a 
document through EDDS does not constitute service of the document on any other party .  If 
service is required, the sender must serve by some other means.  
In sum, EDDS is a document delivery portal that complements the UCS electronic filing 
system and which, upon completion and together with NYSCEF, will allow remote and 
immediate delivery of digitized documents throughout the Unified Court System.  