SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH  
NEW YORK COUNTY  
STATEMENT OF PROCEDURES  
MATRIMONIAL NEUTRAL EVALUATION PROGRAM  
I.  OVERVIEW  
Neutral Evaluation is a confidential alternative dispute resolution process that may result 
in faster, more convenient, less expensive, and less acrimonious settlement than might be the 
case in the normal course of litigation. In Neutral Evaluation, a neutral third party —the Neutral 
Evaluator — hears abbreviated case presentations by the parties and counsel, pr ovides an 
informal assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the arguments and may offer a non -
binding opinion. Neutral Evaluators have significant experience in matrimonial law and specific 
training in Neutral Evaluation. Their assessments and opinion s may help parties to analyze the 
case, facilitate discussion, and generate a settlement.  
The Matrimonial Neutral Evaluation Program (the “MNEP ” or the “Program ”) offers 
parties access free of charge to qualified Neutral Evaluators who meet the criteria se t out in 
Section VI. The goal of the MNEP is to assist the parties and their counsel in reaching a 
resolution on a discrete issue or issues. Although parties are not obligated to settle in Neutral 
Evaluation, parties often resolve the discrete issue or iss ues referred to the Neutral.  
Parties shall attend the Neutral Evaluation session with their attorneys. Referral to the 
Program is not appropriate where only one party is represented by counsel, or in cases of 
domestic violence, child abuse, or severe power  imbalance.  
The Program is established by the New York County Supreme Court, Civil Term with the 
assistance of the MNEP Advisory Committee ( “Advisory Committee ”). The Advisory 
Committee is composed of the Chairs of the Matrimonial Law Committees for the Ne w York 
City Bar Association and the New York County Lawyers Association, the President of the New 
York State Women ’s Bar Association, and a member of the New York Chapter of the American 
Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers designated by its President. The Advis ory Committee assists  
2 the court in developing protocols, recruiting,  and approving neutrals, and raising awareness of 
the MNEP among the Bar and the public.  
II. DEFINITIONS1 
“Neutral ” shall refer to Neutral Evaluators.  
 
“Neutral Evaluation ” refers to a confidential, non -binding process in which a neutral third 
party (the Neutral Evaluator) with expertise in the subject matter relating to the dispute provides 
an assessment of likely court outcomes to help parties reach a settlement.  
III.  PRO CEDURES  
The assigned Matrimonial Part Justice or the assigned Court Attorney -Referee may refer 
parties to the Program on consent. Cases involving child abuse or neglect (as defined in Family 
Court Act § 1012 (e) and (f) and Social Services Law § 412), dome stic violence, or a severe 
power imbalance between the parties are not appropriate for referral to the Program. Cases will 
be screened to avoid inappropriate referrals.  
To begin the process, the court issues an Order of Reference on consent of the parties.  
The Order of Reference specifies the discrete issue (e.g., child custody, visitation and/or financial 
issues, including equitable distribution, child support, add-ons, and separate property) to be 
submitted to the Program. The Order shall direct parties a nd counsel to attend a free, three -hour 
session with a Neutral Evaluator from the Program ’s Roster of Neutrals.  
The Order of Reference shall contain the control date set by the referring Justice or Court -
Attorney Referee for the parties to appear in Court for a conference following the  
Neutral Evaluation session. All pre -trial proceedings scheduled in the Preliminary Conference 
order shall continue and shall not be stayed pending the Neutral Evaluation. If all parties request, 
the referring Justice or  Court -Attorney Referee may agree to extend dates given the particular 
circumstances presented.  
 
1 The definitions for this Program are established in Part 146  of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge.  
3 The Court shall submit  the Order of Reference to the Program Coordinator at  
ADR -1JD@nycourts.gov , subject line: MNEP .  The Coordinator  shall randomly select the names 
of three Neutral Evaluators. Next, the Coordinator shall send to the parties a Notice of 
Confirmation with the three names. Within five business days of receiving the Notice of 
Confirmation, coun sel shall select one of the three proposed Neutral Evaluators and inform the 
Coordinator  of their selection. If counsel for the parties cannot agree, each side shall have the 
right within said five business days to object to one of the selected Neutral Eva luators. The 
remaining Neutral Evaluator shall serve as the Neutral Evaluator, provided there is no conflict of 
interest (as identified in Section XIII herein). If there is a conflict with the remaining Neutral 
Evaluator, counsel shall send an email to the  Coordinator  at the address listed below within ten 
business days of receipt of the Notice of Confirmation with a copy to the other side. The 
Coordinator  shall randomly select names of three additional Neutral Evaluators, and the process 
described above sh all be repeated.  
Within 72 hours after notifying the Program Coordinator of the identity of the Neutral 
Evaluator selected, counsel shall jointly contact the Neutral by conference call or email to  
schedule the first session.  
Parties and counsel are require d to appear at the Neutral Evaluation session within forty -
five days of receiving a Notice of Confirmation.  
The parties ’ counsel shall simultaneously exchange and submit to the Neutral Evaluator a 
concise, two -page summary of the issue presented, relevant facts, and applicable law, if any. The 
parties ’ counsel shall also submit (and exchange if not yet exchanged) copies of each client ’s 
sworn statement of net worth. The foregoing exchange and submissions shall be made so as to 
ensure that the Neutral Evalua tor receives such submissions and statements of net worth at least 
five business days before the scheduled Neutral Evaluation. The Neutral Evaluator may request 
limited, additional information, keeping in mind the additional cost this may cause the respect ive 
parties.  The Neutral Evaluator may further request a conference call with both attorneys 
regarding any preliminary matters.  
4 Within five business days after the conclusion of the Neutral Evaluation session, the 
Neutral Evaluator shall send a Report ( “Report of the Neutral ”) to the Coordinator  and to counsel 
for the parties. The Coordinator  shall forward the Report to the Referring Justice. The Neutral 
Evaluator shall not disclose other information discussed during the Neutral Evaluation, except as 
descr ibed in Section IX.  
IV.  ROLE OF THE NEUTRAL  
The Neutral Evaluator is an expert in the subject matter of the issues referred who hears 
abbreviated case presentations and provides a non -binding assessment of the merits of the 
respective claims in an effort to facilitate settlement. The Neutral Evaluator is not an advocate 
and may give an opinion as to likely court outcomes. At the parties ’ request, the Neutral 
Evaluator may also provide settlement assistance.  
At the initial session, the Neutral Evaluator sha ll explain that all communications are 
confidential (with narrow exceptions outlined below) and will not be disclosed to the Justice 
hearing the case or in any other judicial or administrative proceeding. The Neutral Evaluator 
shall also explain that eithe r party is free at any time to end the Neutral Evaluation and return to 
Court.  
During the Neutral Evaluation, each party relates the facts of the dispute and raises 
particular issues of concern. The Neutral Evaluator may ask the parties clarifying question s 
related to the issues submitted.  
At some point in the process, either party or the party ’s counsel may request a caucus. 
Caucuses are meetings that each side may have alone with the Neutral Evaluator to explore the 
possibility of settlement. During the c aucus, the Neutral Evaluator may explore how each spouse 
views the dispute and the impact of any proposed solutions. The Neutral Evaluator keeps 
confidential the information discussed in caucus unless the party permits disclosure. In 
discussing whether to caucus, the Neutral Evaluator shall explain to the parties the risks of 
separate meetings in the context of an evaluative process where one party is unaware of what the 
other is saying to the Neutral, is unable to respond to what is said, and is unable to determine 
how that might influence the Neutral Evaluator ’s assessments. To guard against this risk, Neutral 
5 Evaluators sometimes place “in their pocket ” their handwritten assessment of a likely court 
outcome before they agree to caucus or attempt to settle the case. By committing to paper their 
assessment and placing it out of view, Neutral Evaluators avoid being influenced by what they 
learn during a caucus and  can retrieve their initial assessment if the parties cannot settle and 
request the Neutral Evaluator ’s evaluation.  
If the parties reach a written agreement during Neutral Evaluation, the parties shall submit 
the agreement to their respective attorn eys for review.  
V.  THE ROLE OF PARTIES, COUNSEL, ATTORNEYS FOR THE 
CHILD AND GUARDIANS AD LITEM  
Experience has demonstrated that party participation — as opposed to exclusive 
participation by counsel — not only increases the likelihood of settlement, but also improves 
compliance with any agreed -upon terms and enhances the parties ’ satisfaction. Accordingly, 
unless exempted by the Neutral for good cause shown, the parties shall be present during the 
Neutral Evaluation session.  
The presence of counsel for each party at all Neutral Evaluation sessions is required.  
VI.  THE ROSTER OF NEUTRALS  
The Program has assembled a Roster of Neutrals. Attorneys who wish to join the Roster 
must comply with the following prerequisites2: 
Neutral Evaluators who wish to qual ify for appointment to the Roster must have 
successfully completed at least six hours of approved training in procedural and ethical 
matters related to Neutral Evaluation and be:  
 
2 The training and qualifications guidelines for the Program are derived from and in certain aspects exceed 
the minimum requirements established in Part 146  of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge.  
6 (1) Lawyers admitted to practice law for at least ten years who also have at 
least seven years of substantial experience in the area of matrimonial law; or  
(2) Individuals who have served at least ten years as a judge with substantial 
experience  in the area of matrimonial law.  
Continuing Education: All Neutral Evaluators must attend at lea st six hours of additional 
approved training relevant to their respective practice areas every two years.  
Application to join the Roster shall be made to the ADR Coordinator and shall include a 
letter of interest with a description of the applicant ’s credentials in the format prescribed by the 
Program. The Coordinator  shall submit any such applications to the Advisory Committee for 
consideration.  
The Administrative Judge, with the advice of the MNEP Advisory Committee, shall 
determine wheth er a person qualifies for inclusion on the Roster and whether a person seeking 
inclusion on the Roster has the requisite temperament, character, and discretion for appointment. 
Continuing presence on the Roster is subject to review by the Administrative Ju dge, with the 
advice of the Advisory Committee. Neutrals may be removed from the Roster at the discretion of 
the Administrative Judge, with the advice of the MNEP Advisory Committee.  
VII.  FEES  
The Program does not charge or administer fees.  
VIII.  IMMUNIT Y 
Neutrals serving in this program shall be immune from suit as a result of  any conduct or 
omission during the performance of duties in that capacity to the extent permissible by law.  
IX.  CONFIDENTIALITY  
Except as set forth below, all oral, written, or other communications made during the 
course of the Neutral Evaluation by any party, Neutral Evaluator, or any other person present 
7 shall be confidential, and shall not be disclosed in any present or future judicial or administrative 
proceeding. Similarly, all information generated in or in connection with the Neutral Evaluation 
— including memoranda, work products or case files of a Neutral Evaluator — shall remain 
confidential and not be subject to disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative 
proceeding. However, Neutral Evaluation shall not be used as a shield wi th respect to otherwise 
discoverable documents or information produced or occurring prior to or outside of the Neutral 
Evaluation process.  
Moreover, except as set forth below, nothing about the substance of the Neutral 
Evaluation, such as the weaknesses or  strengths of the parties ’ cases or the relative willingness of 
parties to discuss settlement proposals, shall be revealed to the referring Justice  or  
Court -Attorney Referee, or any other person by the Neutral Evaluator or any party or attorney. 
The parti es shall report to the Court whether the issue or issues referred to the program have been 
“resolved ” or “not resolved. ”  If resolved , the parties shall prepare and execute a stipulation for 
submission to the Court on the discrete issue or issues which were resolved.  
Notwithstanding these confidentiality provisions, communications and information  may 
be subject to disclosure in any prese nt or future judicial or administrative proceeding in any of 
the following five circumstances:  
1. Attendance  
Whether the parties and their counsel attended the initial session will be reported to the 
referring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee.  
2. Waiver  
Parties  to the Neutral Evaluation and the Neutral Evaluator agree in writing to waive 
confidentiality. The waiver must specify the individual communication(s) or information that will 
be disclosed, the person or entity to whom the disclosure will be made, and the  purpose of the 
disclosure.  
3. Written Agreement  
A writing signed by all the parties embodying a negotiated agreement submitted to the court 
for review. Additionally, a limited report of the outcome, as explained in Section III, will be sent 
8 to the referring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee. Only those signed agreements that have become 
court orders may be admissible in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding.  
4. Threats of Imminent, Serious Harm  
If a communication or information constitutes a credible threat of serious and imminent 
harm, either to the speaker or another person or entity, the appropriate authorities and/or the 
potential victim may be notified.  
5. Allegations of Child Abuse or Neglect  
The communication or information relates to an allegation of child abuse or neglect as 
defined in Family Court Act § 1012  (e) and (f) and Social Services Law § 412 and for which 
disclosure is required pursuant to Social Services Law § 413.  
X.  CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT  
If an allegation of c hild abuse or neglect is made by any party during the Neutral 
Evaluation, the Neutral Evaluator will safely stop the Neutral Evaluation process. Neutral 
Evaluators shall report to the referring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee allegations of child 
abuse o r neglect for which disclosure is required pursuant to Social Services Law § 413.  
XI.  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE/SEVERE POWER IMBALANCE  
When an allegation of domestic violence or severe power imbalance is made by any party 
during the Neutral Evaluation, the Neutra l Evaluator shall safely stop the Neutral Evaluation 
process, meet with each party individually where appropriate to learn as much as possible about 
the circumstances, and consult with the Coordinator  (but not the assigned Justice or members of 
that Justic e’s staff or Court Attorney -Referee) as to whether to resume the process. Allegations 
of domestic violence shall not be disclosed to the referring Justice or Court Attorney -Referee; 
instead, the Coordinator  will give victims information regarding their rig hts in the form 
prescribed in Family Court Act § 812 (5).  
9 XII.  REFERRAL TO THE PROGRAM AND ONGOING 
LITIGATION  
Cases may be referred to Neutral Evaluation on consent of the parties at any time, 
including at the preliminary conference.  
Referral to the Progr am will not stay the court proceedings. The “no stay ” policy 
recognizes the special need for prompt action in matrimonial and family proceedings. Full 
discovery, emergency and pendente lite relief, family dynamics, and the needs of children require 
ongoing access to the Court.  
XIII.  AVOIDING CONFLICTS OF IN TEREST  
Before accepting a Neutral Evaluation, a Neutral Evaluator shall make an inquiry that is 
reasonable under the circumstances to determine whether there are any known facts that a 
reasonable individual would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the Neutral Evaluator, 
including a financial or personal interest in the outcome, and an existing or past relationship with 
a party, the party’s attorneys, or a foreseeable participant in the Neutral Evaluation. The Neutral 
Evaluator shall disclose any such known conflict to the parties and counsel as soon as possible 
before accepting a referral. If unable to function in a fair and impartial manner, the Neutral 
Evaluator shall notify counsel for the parties and the Coordinator . The Coordinator  shall 
thereafter promptly provide counsel for the parties with a Notice of Confirmation containing the 
names of three different Neutral Evaluators.  
Dated: September  16, 2022 
 
SUPREME  COURT, CIVIL BRANCH  
NEW YORK COUNTY  
MATRIMONIAL NEUTRAL EVALUATIO N PROGRAM  
Dejana M. Perrone, Esq.  
ADR  Coordinator  
60 Centre Street, Rm. 1 19M  
New York, N Y 10007  
Phone: 21 2-256-7956  
Email: dperrone@nycourts.gov  
ADR Office Email: ADR -1JD@nycourts.gov  