http://www.nycourts.gov/courts/comdiv/ny/ADR_overview.shtml  
 
COMMERCIAL  DIVISION   
                    
SUPREME COURT, NEW YORK COUNTY  
 
HON. DEBORAH A. KAPLAN      JUSTICES OF THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION:  
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE              JUSTICE ANDREW BORROK   JUSTICE ANDREA MASLEY  
SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH          JUSTICE MARGARET CHAN  JUSTICE BARRY R. OSTRAGER  
NEW YORK COUNTY               JUSTICE  JOEL M. COHEN  JUSTICE ROBERT REED  
            JUSTICE MELISSA CRANE  JUSTICE JENNIFER SCHECTER  
                        
               
                                                                                                                                           
 
RULES AND PROCEDURES OF THE  
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROGRAM  
 
A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS  
 
Rule 1.  Program . The Alternative Dispute Resolution Program (“the Program”) of the 
Commercial Division of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, shall 
be applicable to commercial cases referred by Justices of the Commercial Division and other 
Justices of the Supreme Court as permitted by order of the Administrative Judge.   
 
Rule 2. Panel of Neutrals .   
(a) Requirements to Join Panel.  The Administrative Judge shall establish and maintain 
a panel of Neutrals (“the Panel”) for the Program.  To be e ligible to join the Panel as a 
Mediator, a person shall have a minimum of ten years of experience in the practice of 
commercial law or comparable experience as an accountant or business professional and shall 
satisfy the training and experience requirement s of Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief 
Administrator.  To become a Neutral Evaluator on the Panel, a person must be an attorney or 
former Judge who has the background and the training required by Part 146.   
 
(b) Term of Membership.  The Panel shall conti nue in existence for a term of two years 
from the date the Administrative Judge certifies the Panel as provided in Section 146.3 of Part 
146.  Further, each Neutral shall serve at the pleasure of the Administrative Judge, who may 
 
terminate membership at an y time.  
 
(c) Obligations of Membership:  Each member of the Panel shall, in the event that the 
caseload of the Program requires it, serve as a Neutral  in three matters annually in the 
Program.   Members shall comply with these Rules and Procedu res and with the continuing 
education requirement set forth in Section 146.5 of Part 146.   Information on the members 
of the Panel is accessible on the New York County home page of the website of the Commercial 
Division, the address of which is www.nycour ts.gov/comdiv.  
 
 
Rule 3.  Determination of Suitability; Order of Reference .  Except as provided in Rule 
15, cases are referred to alternative dispute resolution (“ADR”) in the Program by the Justice 
assigned to the case. The assigned Justice may order part ies to undergo ADR in the Program 
where the Justice finds that it would be in the interest of the just and efficient processing of the 
case to do so or upon consent of the parties.  The suitability of an action for ADR shall be 
determined by the assigned J ustice after considering the views of the parties insofar as 
practicable. If a case is referred to ADR, the Justice shall issue an Order of Reference. Such 
Order shall not stay court proceedings in the case unless otherwise specified therein.   
 
Rule 4.  Form of ADR .  Cases referred to the Program shall be mediated unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties.   
 
Rule 5.  Initiation Form .  In cases referred to ADR, the parties shall sign an ADR 
Initiation Form  (accessible  on  the website of the Commercial  Div ision  at the  
following  address: www.nycourts.gov/courts/comdiv/ny/ADR_overview.shtml), in 
counterparts if necessary, and , except as otherwise provided in Rule 15, shall, within four 
business days from the date of the Order of Reference, contact the ADR Coordinator and 
submit the Form to the Coordinator.  
 
Rule 6. Selection of Neutral; Private ADR Providers .  
 
(a) Designation of Neutral .  An action referred to the Program shall be assigned to a 
Neutral from the Panel who shall in the first instance be desi gnated by the ADR Coordinator. 
The Coordinator will endeavor to distribute assignments widely among all members of the 
Panel. The Coordinator may, however, select a particular Neutral if the nature of the matter in 
question calls for special expertise on t he part of the Neutral, if difficulties are encountered in 
locating an available Neutral, or for other administrative reasons. Each Neutral contacted will 
advise the Coordinator as to his or her availability and, prior to serving, will conduct a conflicts 
check as required by subdivision (d) hereof. Within ten business days from receipt of the Order 
of Reference, or, in cases governed by Rule 15, within five business days after the filing of the 
Initiation Form, the Coordinator shall inform the parties of t he identity of the designated 
Neutral. The date of this communication shall constitute the Confirmation Date (subject to 
subdivision (b)).    
 
(b) Selection of Alternate Neutral from Panel .  Once informed of the identity of the 
 
 3 Neutral, the parties shall h ave five business days within which to select an alternate Neutral 
from the Panel. The parties shall agree upon the alternate Neutral and contact him or her 
directly to ensure the Neutral’s availability to handle the matter and the absence of any conflict 
on the Neutral’s part, and shall inform the Coordinator of the alternate selection within the 
five-day deadline. If the parties select an alternate Neutral pursuant hereto, the Confirmation 
Date shall be the date on which they inform the Coordinator of tha t selection.  
 
(c)  Other Person as Neutral .  Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the parties may 
designate as the Neutral a person who is not a member of the Panel or proceed to ADR through 
a private ADR provider and in accordance with the rules thereof, but the parties must 
nevertheless complete the ADR process within the deadlines set forth in these Rules.  
 
(d) Ethical Standards .  Prior to confirmation as the Neutral in any case, a prospective 
Neutral shall conduct a check for conflicts with regard to parties or related entities. The Neutral 
shall decline to serve if he or she would not be able to do so fairly, impartially, and i n 
accordance with the highest professional standards. Neutrals on the Panel shall comply with 
the Standards of Conduct for Mediators of the Commercial Division or, if applicable, the 
Standards of Conduct for Arbitrators and Neutral Evaluators (accessible a t the Internet address 
listed in Rule 5).  Unless all parties consent to the Neutral’s service after having been advised 
of all disqualifying facts, the Neutral shall decline the appointment and another Neutral shall 
promptly be selected.    
 
Rule 7.  Comp ensation of Neutral .   
 
The Neutral designated pursuant to Rule 6 (a) or (b) shall be compensated by the parties 
as follows.   
 
(a) Mediators Designated by the ADR Coordinator .   The Neutral designated as a 
mediator by the ADR Coordinator under Rule 6(a) s hall serve in that role at no charge during 
preparation for the mediation (e.g., scheduling conference and review of documents in 
preparation) and for the first three hours of the actual mediation session or sessions. At the 
conclusion of the three hours, any party may bring the ADR proceeding to an end, but, if the 
parties agree to continue, they shall compensate the  mediator for his or her time thereafter 
at the rate of  $ 400 per hour.   
 
(b) Mediators Designated by the Parties.   If the parties designat e an alternate mediator 
from the Panel pursuant to Rule 6(b) and that person is available and willing to handle the 
matter under the circumstances, the parties shall compensate the mediator at the rate of $ 450 
per hour commencing from the outset of the in itial mediation session.  
 
(c) Agreements of the Mediator and the Parties.   Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and 
(b) of this rule, the mediator and the parties may agree upon a rate in excess of the otherwise 
applicable rate specified in those subdivisions based upon factors such as the complexity of the 
 
 4 case, the number of parties involved, and the experience of the mediator, and may also agree 
to compensate the mediator for preparation time.  All such agreements shall be in writing.   
 
(d) Arbitrators and Neutral Evaluators .  If the parties agree that the form of ADR to be 
undertaken shall be arbitration or neutral evaluation, the Neutral(s) shall be compensated at 
the rate of $ 400 per hour from the commencement of the initial session. Prep aration time will 
not be compensable.  
 
(e)  Party’s Share of Compensation . Unless otherwise agreed, each party to the ADR 
proceeding shall pay an equal share of the Neutral’s compensation.  
 
Rule 8. Confidentiality of Mediation and Neutral Eva luation .  
 
(a) Confidentiality .  An ADR proceeding in the Program, other than a binding 
arbitration, shall be confidential and, except as otherwise provided hereafter, any document 
prepared, or communications made, by parties, their counsel or a Program Ne utral for, during, 
or in connection with the proceeding shall not be disclosed outside its confines by any 
participant.  No party to the proceeding shall, during the action referred to ADR or in any 
other legal matter, seek to compel production of document s, notes, or other writings prepared 
for or generated in connection with the ADR proceeding, or the testimony of any other party or 
the Neutral concerning communications made during the proceeding. A settlement, in whole or 
in part, reached during the ADR proceeding shall be set forth in a writing signed by all parties 
affected or their duly authorized agents.  Documents and information otherwise discoverable 
under the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall not be shielded from disclosure merely because 
they ar e submitted or referred to in the ADR proceeding. Should a party attempt in any legal 
action to compel the testimony of the Neutral concerning the substance of an ADR proceeding 
in the Program, that party shall hold the Neutral harmless against any resulti ng expenses, 
including reasonable legal fees incurred by the Neutral or the reasonable value of time spent by 
the Neutral in representing himself or herself in connection therewith.  
 
(b) Exceptions .  Notwithstanding the foregoing:  
 
(1) A Neutral shall disc lose to a proper authority information obtained in mediation if 
required to do so by law or rule or if the Neutral has a reasonable belief that such disclosure 
will prevent a participant from engaging in an illegal act.  
 
(2) A party, the ADR Coordinator, o r the Neutral may report any unethical conduct 
during the proceeding to a proper authority.  
 
(3) The Neutral and the parties may communicate with the ADR Coordinator about 
administrative details of and the schedule for the proceeding, including as provided  in Rule 10; 
the ADR Coordinator may communicate with the assigned Justice in accordance with Rule 10 
(h); and the Neutral may make general reference to the fact of services rendered in any action 
 
 5 to collect an unpaid fee for services performed under these  Rules.  
 
Rule 9. Immunity of the Neutral .  Any Neutral from the Panel who is designated to 
serve pursuant to these Rules and Procedures shall be immune from suit based upon actions 
engaged in or omissions made while so serving.  
 
Rule 10. Procedure .   
 
(a) Deadline for First Session; Scheduling .  The first ADR session shall be conducted no 
later than 30 days from the Confirmation Date. Immediately after confirmation, the Neutral 
shall contact all counsel and parties to discuss the matter and  schedule all proceedings, 
typically by conducting a conference call. All counsel and parties shall promptly communicate 
with one another and the Neutral and take all steps necessary to schedule the first proceeding 
in compliance with said deadline.  Failu re of any party or counsel to respond to 
communications in a timely manner or to participate in scheduling the mediation session may 
subject counsel to sanctions.   
   
(b) Preliminary Submissions .  At least ten days before the first session in cases being 
mediated or undergoing neutral evaluation, each party shall deliver to the Neutral a copy of its 
pleadings and a memorandum of not more than ten pages (except as otherwise agreed) setting 
forth that party's opinions as to the facts and the issues that are not in dispute, contentions as 
to liability and damages, and suggestions as to how the matter might be resolved. This 
memorandum shall not be filed in court nor, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, served on 
the adversary, and it shall be destroyed by the Neutral immediately upon completion of the 
proceeding.   
 
(c)   Attendance Required .  Attendance of the parties is required at the first three 
hours of the mediation proceeding, whether at a single session or more than one. Unless 
exempted by the Neutr al for good cause, every party must appear at each ADR session in 
person or, in the case of a corporation or other business entity, by an official (or more than one 
if necessary) who is both fully familiar with all pertinent facts and empowered on his or h er 
own to settle the matter. Where necessary to an effective mediation, the Neutral may require 
the insurance carrier of a party to attend. In addition, counsel of record for each represented 
party shall be present at each session. Any attorney who partici pates in the ADR process shall 
be fully familiar with the action and authorized to take all steps necessary to a meaningful 
mediation process.  
 
(d)   Adjournments .  Once a session of the ADR proceeding has been scheduled, it 
may be adjourned only at the d irection of the Neutral and not beyond 45 days from the 
Confirmation Date.  
 
(e) Reporting of the Status to the Coordinator .  On the 40th day from the Confirmation 
Date, the Neutral shall report to the ADR Coordinator the status of the proceeding.  
 
 6  
(f)  Discovery .  Subject to any applicable disclosure order of the court, the Neutral 
may help the parties to provide such focused discovery as may assist in the ADR proceeding.   
 
(g)  Failure to Comply with Rules .  If a party or counsel fails to cooperate in ma king 
arrangements for the mediation or to take steps preliminary thereto, as provided in 
subdivisions (a) and (b) of this rule, fails to appear at any scheduled session, or otherwise fails 
to comply with these Rules, the Neutral shall advise the ADR Coordi nator, succinctly specifying 
the nature of the infraction.  If the Neutral reports that an infraction has occurred, he or she 
may recommend the imposition of sanctions, or, where such a report of the Neutral is silent as 
to sanctions, the ADR Coordinator m ay recommend the imposition of sanctions based upon 
that report.   
 
(h)  Communications with Justice .  
 
(1) Communications In General. The ADR Coordinator may communicate with the 
assigned Justice about administrative details of the processing of any case referred to 
the Program by that Justice, but shall not identify the Neutral designated or disclose any 
substantive aspect of the ADR proceeding.  If a proceeding is terminated after three 
hours without a settlement, the Coordinator shall not reveal to the Justice which party 
brought the proceeding to an end.  The Coordinator shall report to the Justice at the 
conclusion of the proceeding whether a resolution of the case in whole or in part was 
reached.   
 
(2) Reporting Violations of the Rules; Sanctions.  The Coordinator shall report to the 
Justice, on an appropriate form, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the parties, any 
violation of these Rules as reported by a Neutral pursuant to subdivision (g)  of this 
Rule and any recommendation for sanctions by the Neutral or by the Coordinator based 
upon the report of the Neutral.  The Justice may impose sanctions o r take such other 
action as the Justice may find to be necessary to ensure respect for the court’s Order 
and these Rules.  
 
Rule 11. Completion of ADR; Report .  
 
(a) Conclusion; Continuation; Monitoring by Coordinator . The ADR process shall be 
concluded wit hin 45 days from the Confirmation Date.  If the matter has not been entirely 
resolved within that period, but the parties and the Neutral believe that it would be beneficial if 
the ADR process were to continue, the process may go forward for an additional 30 days. The 
ADR process shall be completed within 75 days from the Confirmation Date unless the assigned 
Justice, upon request presented by the ADR Coordinator, specifically authorizes the process to 
continue beyond that date. The ADR Coordinator will mon itor progress of ADR proceedings to 
ensure that the deadlines set forth herein are complied with.  
 
 
 7 (b) Report of Outcome .  Except as provided in Rule 12, the Neutral shall report the 
outcome of the proceeding to the ADR Coordinator no later than three busi ness days after its 
conclusion.  If the ADR process is successful, the parties shall forthwith submit a stipulation of 
discontinuance to the County Clerk (with fee) and transmit a copy to the Part of the Justice 
assigned.   
 
Rule 12.  Arbitration . Parties who choose to arbitrate shall agree upon appropriate 
procedures to govern the process to the extent not herein provided.  If the parties are unable 
to so agree, the matter shall either be mediated, or, upon consent, arbitrated pursuant to 
procedures issued  by the ADR Coordinator. An award shall be issued within seven business days 
after conclusion of the arbitration proceeding.  
 
Rule 13.  Conversion of Mediation to Binding Arbitration .   
 
(a) Arbitration Permitted .  Mediation may be converted to binding ar bitration in the 
Program upon consent of all parties at any stage in the mediation process.  Any such 
arbitration, however, must proceed before a Neutral different than the one who presided over 
the mediation session(s), unless the mediator did not receive  any information from a party ex 
parte  prior to the time an agreement to proceed to arbitration was reached.   
 
(b) Stipulation; Identification of Arbitrator(s); Fee .  Within five days from conclusion of 
the mediation proceeding, parties who wish to undergo arbitration pursuant to this Rule shall 
deliver to the ADR Coordinator a written stipulation submitting the case to arbitration under 
this Rule.  There shall be a single arbitrator unless the parties agree to have three. Togethe r 
with the stipulation the parties shall transmit the name of the person or persons they have 
agreed upon to serve as arbitrator(s). If the parties are unable to agree upon the person or 
persons who shall serve, the Coordinator shall select the arbitrator( s).  Each arbitrator shall be 
entitled to a fee as provided in Rule 7 (d).  
 
(c)  Deadlines . The arbitration shall be completed within 45 days from the date on 
which the Coordinator advises the parties of the confirmation of the selection of the 
arbitrator(s).  
 
Rule 14.  Further ADR .  After completion of a mediation, upon request of a party or 
upon its own initiative, the court, in its discretion, may issue an order directing a second 
referral to mediation, which shall proceed in accordance with these Rules. In any such case, the 
parties shall compensate the Neutral as provided in Rule 7 (b) wit h respect to alternate 
mediators.  
 
B.  MANDATORY MEDIATION PILOT PROJECT  
 
Rule 15.  Procedures in the Pilot Project .   
 
 
 8 (a) Cases Subject to Mandatory Mediation in the Pilot Project .  By an Administrative 
Order or Orders of the Administrative Judge of this  court, a pilot project (“the Pilot Project”) 
shall be established for the mandatory mediation of certain commercial cases filed outside the 
Commercial Division as defined in the Order or Orders.   
 
(b) Designation of Cases .  As provided in any applicable Administrative Order of the 
Administrative Judge, the staff of the court shall identify all commercial cases that are subject 
to mandatory mediation in the Pilot Project upon the filing of the Request for Judicial 
Intervention (“RJI”).  In each such case, the court will provide notice to the parties through the 
New York State Courts Electronic Filing System of the designation of the case as one subject to 
the Administrative Order. All parties and counsel shall proceed to mediation in accordance with 
that Or der and these Rules and Procedures.  Failure to comply with that Order and these Rules 
and Procedures may result in the imposition of sanctions.  
 
(c) Preliminary Conference Part .  The initial Administrative Order shall establish a 
Preliminary Conference Pa rt to handle such conferences in the kinds of cases that are subject to 
mandatory mediation in the Pilot Project.  The preliminary conference in all such cases shall 
take place in this Part before the Justice assigned to the Part.  Other proceedings in suc h cases 
shall be handled by the Justice to whom the case has been assigned upon filing of the RJI.  The 
Justice presiding in the Preliminary Conference Part shall address all discovery issues in each 
case that are pending as of the time of the conference a nd shall also make any directives with 
regard to discovery that may assist the parties to have a productive and successful mediation.   
 
(d) Exemption .   A case otherwise subject to mandatory mediation in the Pilot Project 
may be exempted from such mediati on upon a satisfactory showing that the applying party 
would be subjected to unreasonable hardship or burden by participation in the mediation.  A 
party seeking an exemption shall apply therefor at the preliminary conference.  Failure to seek 
an exemption as provided in this subdivision shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the 
mediation.  
 
 
(e) Initiation Form and Other Procedures .  Within four business days after the 
preliminary conference, the parties shall submit an Initiation Form to the ADR Coordinator as 
provided in Rule 5 hereof.  The parties shall comply with all subsequent procedures of the ADR 
process as set forth in thes e Rules, including the deadlines set forth in Rule 10.   
 
(f) Compensation of Mediator .  The mediator shall be compensated as provided in Rule 
7 hereof.   
C.  ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM  
 
Rule 16. Administration of Program . The Program shall be supervised b y the 
Clerk -in-Charge of the Commercial Division Support Office. The conduct of ADR proceedings 
shall be coordinated by an Alternative Dispute Resolution Coordinator or Coordinators.  
 
 9  
Effective Date: May 1, 2017  
 
 
COMMERCIAL DIVISION  
ALTERNATIVE  DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROGRAM  
Supreme Court, New York County  
New York County Courthouse  
60 Centre Street  
New York, New York 10007  
Phone: 212 -256-7986  
E-mail: ADR -1JD@nycourts.gov  
 
 
Revised: 11/18/2021  