SUP REME COURT OF  THE STATE OF  NEW YORK
COUNTY OF  PUTNAM
HON. VICTOR G . GROSSMAN
RULES OF  THE P UTNAM COUNTY 
ALTERNATIVE DISP UTE RESOLUTION P ROG RAM 
PREAMBLE
It is the policy  of the Courts of this State, as set forth in the State Chief Judge’s Excellence
Initiative, to encourag e the resolution of disputes and the early  settlement of pending  litigation
throug h various settlement procedures. The Putnam County  Supreme Court desires to use
mediation as one method of settling  disputes. The benefits to the parties are many, not only in a
savings of time and money , but also in providing  a result in which all parties benefit. The
following  Rules shall govern cases which qualify  for Alternative Dispute Resolution (“ADR”)
throug h presumptive mediation and optional mediation.  The Rules set forth herein are intended
to apply  in the Supreme Court of Putnam County .  These Rules supplement and shall be applied
in tandem with the Rules of the Alternat ive Dispute Resolution Prog ram for the Ninth Judicial
District (the “Ninth JD Rules”).  Capitalized terms to the extent not defined herein are as defined
in the Ninth J D Rules.
Rule 1 . Program :
The Supreme Court of the State of New York, County  of Putnam, employ s the Alternative
Dispute Resolution Prog ram instituted by the Ninth Judicial District.  Unless otherw ise directed
by the Court , cases referred to the Program shall be mediated.  Cases which qualify  for referral
to the Prog ram shall be those cases that have been designated by the Court as qualify ing for
presumptive mediation, as identified in Rule 2 herein, as well as any cases where all parties have
elected to pursue mediation, and any cases where the Court has exercised its discr etion to refer
the cases to mediation.  
Rule 2 . Cases Qualif ying f or Presum ptive Mediation and Determ ination of  Suitability:
Listed below are those  cases which have been desig nated as qualify ing for presumptive
mediation.  All such cases shall be referred to mediation utiliz ing the proce dures and forms
established by the Ninth  JD Rules.  Those forms enable parties and/or their counsel to identify
whether their case qualifies for mediation. The Court will review such forms to confirm that the
case does qualify , in which event the mediation shall be initiated, and an Order of Reference
issued in accordance with the Ninth JD Rules.  The following  cases are deemed to qualify  for
presumptive mediation:
-1-
4180941.v10
A.PRESUMPTI VE MEDI ATION
1. Matrimonial- with or without children
2. Matrimonial – W -2 employ ees/custody
3. Tort with claims under $75,000.
4. Contract/Commercial claims under $75,000.
B.OPTI ONAL  MEDI ATION
1. Personal injury  actions
2. Commercial actions
3. Matrimonial actions, except in cases involving  alleg ations of domestic violence
and/or where temporary  or permanent Orders of Protection have been issued.
C. Any case which does not fall into the list of cases above, but where all parties request
mediation, or where the Court directs the case to go to mediation in the exercise of the
Court’s discretion.
Rule 3. Roster of  Mediators and Com pensation:
The Administrative Judge for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and maintain a Roster of
Mediators for the Court (“the Roster”).
(i) In order to be eligible to serve as a Mediator and be listed on the Roster, a person shall
possess the following  qualifications and such others as may hereafter be promulg ated. A
mediator must: (a) have completed at least the amount and type of training  required by
Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator or equivalent experience; (b) have
recent experience mediating   cases as mandated by Part 146; and (c) comply  with the
Ninth J udicial District’s  Standards of Conduct for Mediators.
 Part 146 requires prospective mediators to have successfully  comple ted a minimum of forty  (40)
hours of training  in an OCA-sponsored or OCA-recog nized training  program, which includes 24
hours of training  in basic mediation skills and techniques and 16 hours of training  in the specific
mediation techniques pertaining  to commercial litigation (see Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief
Administrator).
-2-
4180941.v10
(ii) Continuing  presence on the Roster is subject to review by the Administrative Judge.
Mediators may  be removed from the Roster at the discretion of the Administrative J udge.
(iii) The Roster will be available throug h the Court’s website (www.ny courts.g ov).
(iv) Unless otherwise directed by the Court, the Mediator shall be compensated in accordance
with the Ninth JD Rules, including  those provisions allowing  for exemptions from
parties having  to pay for mediator compensation and those provisions allowing  for
portions of the Mediator’s time to be non-compensable.
Rule 4. P rocedure; Autom atic Disclosures:
(i) Unless otherwise directed by the Mediator, at least ten days before the first mediation
session, each party  shall deliver to the Mediator a copy of that party ’s marked pleading s
(including  responsive pleading s) together with a pre-me diation memorandum in the form
set forth in the Ninth JD Rules.   Except as otherwise agreed, this memorandum shall not
be served on the adversary  or filed in Court, shall be read only by the Mediator, and shall
be destroy ed by  the Mediator immediately  upon completion of the mediation.
(ii) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties and the Mediator, or as directed by the Mediator,
within ten days of the filing  of the Order of Reference pursuant to the Ninth JD Rules, the
parties shall exchang e information as specified in the Mediation Disclosure Protocols
annex ed hereto as Schedule 1.  Disclosure for mediation purpos es shall be consistent with
the efficient resolution of the case.  Unle ss otherwise directed by the Court or Mediator or
agreed to by the parties, the timeframe covering  information to be produced pursuant to the
Mediation Disclosure Protocols shall be from the earliest date by which the statute of
limitations on any  claim asserted in the action beg an to accrue.
(iii) The Justices of the Court shall have the discretion to modify  the deadlines for initiation
and completi on of the mediation process, including  the discretion to limit required
disclosure or to allow for additional disclosure beyond that which is exchang ed pursuant to
the Mediation Disclosure Protocols prior to the initiation of the mediation process. 
Rule 5. Continuation of  Mediation af ter Expiration of  the 45-Day P eriod:
If the matter has not been entirely  resol ved within the 45-day  period as provided in the Ninth JD
Rules, but the parties and the Mediator believe that it would be beneficial if the mediation
process were to continue, the process may go forward, but in such event, there shall be no
extension or stay of the proceeding s unless otherwise provided by the Ninth JD Rules or leave is
granted by  a Justice of the Court.
-3-
4180941.v10
Rule 6. F urther Mediation:
After completion of the mediation, or upon request of a party or upon its own initiative, the
Presiding  Division Justice, in his or her discretion, may issue an order directing  a second referral
to the Program. Any such referral shall be entertained and ordered as early  as practicable and
shall be administered in accordance with these and the Ninth J D Rules.  
Rule 7. Adm inistration of  Program : 
The Prog ram shall be supervis ed and coordinated by the Principal Court Attorney  for the
presid ing Justice assig ned to the case who shall act as the Administrator for the implementation
of ADR for that case.
Rev. Aug ust 2019
SUPREME COURT-PUTNAM COUNTY
PUTNAM COUNTY COURTHOUSE 
20 COUNTY CENTER
CARMEL , NEW  YORK 10512
-4-
4180941.v10
Schedule 1
General Mediation Disclosure P rotocols 
 Suprem e Court, P utnam  County
A. G ENERAL P ROTOCOLS
1.Documents sufficient to establish the subject contract, statutory cause of action (including
the alleg ed violation), or the relationship between the parties;
2.Preliminary  calculation of dama ges, including  for counterclaims, cross-claims, and third
party actions;
3.Proof of any insurance (including  excess) available to satisfy  any cause of action as well as
proof of any  reservation of rig hts or disclaimer of coverag e;  
4.Documents sufficient to show any  dispositive affirmative defense(s);
5.For construction disputes, only such documents as are necessary  for the parties and Mediator
to understand the nature and facilitate the resolution of the dispute, such as, for example,
contracts , change orders, engineering  reports, desig n documents, project minutes, mechanic’s
liens and if a subcontracto r was replaced, the cost of the replacement subcontractor;
6.To ensure that there is no gap in communication, parties should advise their adversary of any
chang e in position reg arding  a previous settlement demand or offer;
7.Any other documents that the parties, in consultation with the Mediator at the pre-mediation
conference, ag ree to ex chang e;
8.The names and titles of the people who will be attending  the mediation;
9.Counsel are, of course, encourag ed to exchang e any documents they believe would be
helpful to the resolution of the dispute.
B. MATRI MONI AL ACTI ONS
1. In all matrimonial actions, upon the filing  of a Request for J udicial I ntervention
and the scheduling  of the Preliminary  Conference, the Court shall include with
the letter scheduling  the Preliminary  Conference, a questionnaire to be completed
by the filing  party  within ten (10) day s to assist the Court in determining  if
Mediation is appropriate.
-5-
4180941.v10
2. Upon receipt of the completed questionnaire, or at the Preliminary  Conference,
the Court may  order the parties to attempt to mediate the action and adjourn the
proceeding s for a period of forty -five (45) day s for that purpose, in addition to
any other necessary  temporary  orders reg arding  issues of support, maintenance,
custody  and access.
3. In the event Mediation is ordered, the parties may  recommend a Mediator to the
Court, but the Court shall make the final determination of the Mediator.
4. The parties shall provide the Mediator with a copy  of their Statement of Net
Worth, the three most recently  filed F ederal and State tax  returns, current salary
information and pay checks, as well as Deferred Compensation Statements and
any and all information related to the ownership, value, and equity  of the marital
residence.  At any  stage, the Mediator may  request a party  to submit additional
information as the Mediator deems appropriate.
C. PERSONAL  INJURY ACTI ONS
1. Within 60 day s of the filing  of the first Answer in such cases, the parties must
produce the information specified in the following  discovery  protocol.  W ithin 90
days of the filing  of that Answer or Request for J udicial I ntervention (RJ I), or as
soon thereafter as it can be scheduled, the parties, their counsel, and any  insurance
representatives must participate in a mediation session.  I f any  party believes that
there is g ood cause why  a particular case should be ex empted or delay ed from the
Discovery  schedule, in whole or in part, or that mediation should be adjourned
until a later date, that party  must raise the issue promptly  with the Court.  Unless
the presiding  judg e has already  scheduled or held an initial pre-trial conference, if
the mediation is unsuccessful, the parties shall promptly  request that the presiding
judge schedule an initial compliance conference.
2. In order to facilitate mediation, within 60 day s of the filing  of the first Answer or
RJI, whichever shall first occur, all parties shall produce the following , if
applicable:
a. Incident or accident reports concerning  the incident or accident;
b. Any insurance ag reement under which an insurance business may  be
liable to satisfy  all or part of a possible judg ment in the action or to
indemnify  or reimburse for pay ments made to satisfy  the judg ment;
c. All photog raphs and videos (including  surveillance and security  videos)
depicting  the incident or accident including : damag e to vehicle(s), injuries
-6-
4180941.v10
sustained by  parties, or the incident or accident scene, and/or any  other
photog raphs or videos which relate to this case;
d. The names and contact information for each person who witnessed the
incident or accident;
e. All statements or communications of any  witness(es) to the incident or
accident;
f. For motor vehicle cases, any  invoices, bills, or repair estimates relating  to
the repair of the vehicle(s) involved in the accident; and
g. For cases alleg ing damage to property , other than to motor vehicles,
estimates of the damag e and costs of repair to the property .
3. Plaintiff(s) shall produce to the Defendant(s) the following  documents, if
applicable:
a. If the Plaintiff is claiming  lost income, Plaintiff shall produce any
documents supporting  that claim including : any  income tax  returns or
documents which refer to Plaintiff’s employ ment, W -2 forms, the records
of the dates of absences from work, the records relating  to the facts and
duration of any  unemploy ment, the records of workers’ compensation
claims, unemploy ment insurance claims, and applications for assistance
from any  governmental ag ency because of unemploy ment or ill health;
b. All medical reports and records in Plaintiff’s possession relating  to the
injuries at issue in this matter, as well as any  bills, reports, notes and
records prepared by  any physician, hospital, or healthcare provider who
has ex amined, evaluated, and/or treated plaintiff for injuries sustained as a
result of the incident/accident;
c. Authoriz ations for release of all medical records relating  to the injuries
sustained by  the Plaintiff because of the incident/accident; and
d. Documentation concerning  any Medicare liens.
4. Defendant(s) must produce to the Plaintiff(s) the following  documents, if
applicable:
a. Any Independent Medical Ex amination report as well as any  and all bills,
reports, notes, and records prepared by  any Independent Medical
Examiner or healthcare provider who has ex amined or evaluated Plaintiff;
-7-
4180941.v10
b. Any documents which refer to any  inspection made of the area where the
incident or accident occurred on or after the date of the incident or
accident and for a period of twelve months prior thereto;
c. Any documents which refer to any  complaints or violations issued for the
subject location on or after the date of the incident and in the twelve
months prior thereto;
d. Any documents referring  to or describing  any repairs, replacements, or
alterations, to the subject location;
e. Policy  and procedure manuals, posted notices, and any  other documents
connected to routine repairs, cleaning , maintenance, and upkeep of the
premises;
f. Notices and any  other documents connected to non-routine repairs,
cleaning , maintenance, and upkeep of the area where the incident or
accident occurred, up to and including  the date of the subject incident or
accident; and
g. Any documents related to ownership and control of the subject premises.
D. COMMERCI AL MATTERS
1. In commercial matters involving  claims of less than $75,000.00, the party  filing  a
Request for J udicial I ntervention (“RJ I”) shall file contemporaneously  an Addendum identify ing
the cause of action and nature of the matter, tog ether with a brief description of the amount
claimed for compensatory  damag es, equitable or declaratory  relief, and any  counterclaims that
have been interposed.
2. The Court may , by Order, refer the parties to Mediation
1. Within six ty (60) day s of the Preliminary  Conference;
2. Within thirty  (30) day s after document and interrog atory  discovery  has
been completed;
3. When depositions of the parties have been completed;
4. At such other time during  proceeding s as the Court determines may  be
appropriate.
-8-
4180941.v10