Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  Coordinator  (10N):  TBD 
100 Supreme  Court  Drive,  Mineola,  New York 11501  
Nassau  ADR  Website:  https://ww2.nycourts.gov/courts/10jd/nassau/ADR.shtml#district  NASSAU  COUNTY  SUPREME  COURT  
 
 
Civil  Case  ADR  Program  (CCADR)_   
• Available to all civil cases that are not already included in a separate ADR program within this District. 
Trial ready  TORT  cases  (except  medical  malpractice)  are particularly  suitable  for CCADR  Program.  Case 
should be referred only after sufficient discovery has been completed.  
• Cases are mediated by Part 146 trained mediator from the Program’s Roster of Neutrals. Neutral’s 
assigned  by the Court,  will provide  a free 90-minute  initial  session.  Compensation  shall not exceed  $450 
per hour for mediation and preparation time beyond the initial session.  
• Part Clerk must file executed CCADR Order of Reference  with NYSCEF as document type “Order - 
Reference to ADR”.  
• Parties must file CCADR Program Assignment Form  with NYSCEF within business 5 days of  receipt of  
Order.  Parties may elect to choose and pay for their own neutral or have a roster mediator assigned by 
ADR Coordinator.  
 
Commercial  Division  ADR  Program  _ 
• Available  to any commercial  case  regardless  of amount  in dispute.  Cases  shall be referred  as early  as is 
practicable by an Order of Reference to the Commercial Division ADR Program . 
• Cases are mediated by a Part 146 trained mediator or neutral evaluator from the Program’s Roster of 
Neutrals.  Neutral will provide a free 4 -hour initial session, 1 -hour can be applied to preparation time. 
Compensation shall not exceed $500 per hour for mediation and preparation t ime beyond the initial 
session.  Mediator  is generally  selected  by the parties.  However,  the Court  will select  the neutral  if parties 
cannot agree and submit four names from the roster to the Court.  
• Part Clerk must file executed Order of Reference with NYSC EF as document type “Order -Reference to 
ADR”.  Parties must file Commercial Initiation Form  within 5 business  days of receipt of Order with 
NYSCEF.  
 
In-House  Mediation  Program   
• Preferred for complex disputes requiring Court oversite and/or multiple sessions.  Recommended for 
Medical Malpractice, Real Property, CVA and disputes involving related parties. No cost for mediation 
and multiple sessions may be held in -person or virtually.  
• Referring Judge should exercise discretion in making referrals to ensure that the case is ready and 
appropriate for mediation at the time of referral. Party contact information should be included on the 
referral order. Cases  are mediated by select Judges, JHOs, volunteer mediators or a Court Attorney. 
Court will assign the mediator on rotating basis based upon availability.  
• Part Clerk  must  file executed  referral  order  with NYSCEF  as document  type “Order -Reference  to ADR”.  
 
Voluntary  Private  Mediation  _ 
• Parties  may stipulate  to use a private  ADR  provider  to facilitate  resolution  of their  case  at any time.  The 
parties may negotiate a fee with their selected neutral.  Private Mediators can be found through the 
Statewide Mediator Directory online at https://ww2.nycourts.gov/ip/adr/MedDirectory.shtml  
• Some local private ADR providers who may facilitate dispute resolution include: JAMS; The Jansen 
Group;  Mediation  Solutions;  The Nassau  County  Bar Association  ADR  Panels;  NAM  (National  Arbitration 
and Mediation); Resolute Systems, LLC; and SSAM (Settlement Systems Arbitration & Mediation). 
Providers  may offer an initial  session  at a reduced  rate for court  ordered  ADR.  This list is for convenience 
only. The Court does not favor these prov iders over any other private ADR Neutral or Provider and 
litigants are free choose any private ADR entity.  (November_2023)  
