SUP REME COURT OF  THE STATE OF  NEW YORK
DIFFERENTIATED CASE MANAG EMENT P ARTS
COUNTY OF  WESTCHESTER
HON. JOAN B. LEF KOWITZ , JSC
HON. TERRY JANE RUDERMAN, JSC
HON. NICHOLAS COLABELLA, JHO
RULES OF  THE  
ALTERNATIVE DISP UTE RESOLUTION P ROG RAM 
PREAMBLE
It is the policy  of the Courts of this State, as set forth in the State Chief Judge’s Excellence
Initiative, to encourag e the resolution of disputes and the early settlement of pending  litigation
throug h various settlement procedures. The following  Rules shall govern cases which qualify  for
Alternative Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) throug h presumptive mediation. The Rules set forth
herein are intended to apply  in the Differentiated Case Management Parts (Preliminary
Conference Part, Compliance Part, Settlement Conference Part and Trial Ready  Part) of the
Supreme Court of Westchester County . These Rules supplement and shall  be applied in tandem
with the Rules of the Alternative Dispute Resolution Prog ram for the Ninth Judicial District
(“the Ninth JD Rules”). Capitaliz ed terms  to the extent not defined herein are as defined in the
Ninth J D Rules. 
Rule 1. P rogram :
The Differentiated Case Management (“DCM”) Parts of the Supreme Court of the State of New
York, County  of Westchester, employ  the Alternative Dispute Resolution Progr am instituted by
the Ninth Judicial District. Unless otherwise directed by the Court, cases  referred to the Prog ram
shall be mediated. Cases which qualify  for referral to the Program shall be those cases that have
been desig nated by the DCM Parts as qualify ing for presumptive mediation, as identified in Rule
2 herein, as well as any cases where all parties have elected to pursue mediation, and any cases
where the Court has ex ercised its discretion to refer the cases to mediation. 
Rule 2. Cases Qualif ying f or Presumptive Mediation and Determ ination of  Suitability:
Listed below are those cases which have been desig nated as qualify ing for presumptive
mediation. All such cases shall be referred to mediation utiliz ing the procedures and forms
established by the Ninth JD Rules. Those forms enable parties or their counsel to identify
whether their case qualifies for mediation, following  which the applicable DCM Part will review
such forms to confirm that the case does qualify , in which event the mediation shall be initiated
1
and an Order of Refe rence issued in accordance with the Ninth JD Rules. The following  cases
are deemed to qualify  for presumptive mediation:
(1) Personal injury  actions, including  motor vehicle accidents, involving  claims or insurance
coverag e of $50,000.00 or less;
(2) Collection cases involving  claims of $50,000.00 or less;
(3) Breach of contract actions related to home improvement or real estate matters involving
claims of $50,000.00 or less; 
(4) Subrog ation matters seeking  recovery  of $25,000.00 or less; 
(5) Partition actions; and 
(6) Any case which does not fall into the list of cases above, but where all parties
request mediation, or where the Court directs the case to g o to mediation in the ex ercise
of the Court’s discretion.
Rule 3. Roster of  Mediators and Com pensation: 
The Administrative Judge for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and maintain a Roster of
Mediators for the DCM Parts (“the Roster”).
(i) In order to be elig ible to serve as a Mediator and be listed on the Roster, a person shall
possess  the following  qualifications and such others as may hereafter be promulg ated. A
mediator must: (a) have completed at least the amount and type of training  require d by
Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator; (b) have recent experience mediating
personal injury  and/or civil litig ation in Supreme Court cases as mandated by  Part 146;1  
(ii) Continuing  presence on the Roster is subject to review by the Administrative Judge.
Mediators may be removed from the Roster at the discretion of the Administrative Judge; 
(iii) The Roster will be available throug h the DCM Protocol website;      
(iv) Unless otherwise directed by the DCM Justices , the Mediator shall be compensated in
accordance with the Ninth JD Rules, including  those provisions allowing  for exemptions
from parties having  to pay for mediator compensation and those provisions allowing  for
portions of the Mediator’s time to be non-compensable;
(v) Parties may  agree to private mediation.          
Rule 4. P rocedure; Autom atic Disclosures:
1 Part 146 requires prospective mediators to have successfully  completed a minimum of forty
(40) hours of training  in an OCA-sponsored or OCA-recog nized training  prog ram, which
includes 24 hours of training  in basic mediation skills and techniques and 16 hours of training  in
the specific mediation techniques pertaining  to the subject area of the ty pes of cases referred to
them (see Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator). 
2
(i)        Unless otherwise directed by  the Mediator, at least ten day s before the first mediation 
session, each party shall deliver to the Mediator a copy  of that party ’s marked pleading s
(including  responsive pleading s) together with a pre-mediation memorandum in the form
set forth in the Ninth JD Rules. Except as otherwise agreed, this memorandum shall not
be served on the adversary  or filed in court, shall be read only by the Mediator, and shall
be destroy ed by  the Mediator immediately  upon completion of the mediation. 
(ii) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties and the Mediator or as directed by the Mediator,
within ten days of the filing  of the Order of Reference pursuant to the Ninth JD Rules, the
parties shall exchang e information as specified in the Mediation Disclosure Protocols
annex ed hereto as Schedule 1. Disclosure for mediation purposes shall be consistent with
the efficient resolution of the case. Unless otherwise directed by the Court or Mediator or
agreed to by the parties, the timeframe covering  information to be produced pursuant to
the Mediation Disclosure Protocols shall be from the earliest date by which the statute of
limitations on any  claim asserted in the action beg an to accrue. 
(iii) The Justices of the DCM Parts shall have the discretion to modi fy the deadlines for
initiation and completion of the mediation process, including  the discretion to limit
required disclosure or to allow for additional disclosur e beyond that which is exchang ed
pursuant to the Mediation Disclosure Protocols prior to the initiation of the mediation
process.
Rule 5. Continuation of  Mediation af ter Expiration of  the 45-Day P eriod:
If the matter has not been entirely  resolved within the 45-day  period as provided in the Ninth JD
Rules, but the parties and the Mediator believe that it would be beneficial if the mediation
process were to continue, the process may go forward, but in such event, there shall be no
extension or stay of the proceeding s unless otherwise provided by the Ninth JD Rules or leave is
granted by  a Justice of the DCM Parts. 
Rule 6: F urther Mediation:
After completion of the mediation, upon request of a party  or upon its own initiative, the DCM
Part Justice, in his or her discretion, may issue an order directin g a second referral to the
Prog ram. Any such referral shall be entertained and ordered as early  as practicable and shall be
administered in accordance with these and the Ninth J D Rules. 
Rule 7. Adm inistration of  Program :
The Prog ram shall be supervised and coordinated by a Court Attorney -Referee for the DCM
Parts, who shall act as the Administrator for the implementation of ADR for that case.
3
Schedule 1
Mediation Disclosure P rotocols 
DCM P arts, Suprem e Court, Westchester County 
1.Documents sufficient to establish the subject contract, statutory  cause of action
(including  the alleg ed violation), or the relationship between the parties; 
2.Preliminary  evaluation of damag es, including  for counterclaims, cross-claim s, and third-
party  actions;
3.Proof of any insurance (including  excess) available to satisfy  any cause of action as well
as proof of any  reservation of rig hts or disclaimer of coverag e; 
4.Documents sufficient to show any  dispositive affirmative defense; 
5.For construction or real estate disputes, only such documents as are necessary  for the
parties and Mediator to understand the nature and facilitate the resolution of the dispute,
such as, appraisals, contracts, change orders, engineering  reports, desig n documents,
project minutes, mechan ic’s liens and if a subcontractor was replaced, the cost of the
replacement subcontractor;
6.Medical records and ex amination reports;
7.Bills of Particulars;
8.Photog raphs or video recording s; 
9.Any other documents that the parties, in consultation with the Mediator at the pre-
mediation conference, ag ree to ex chang e;
10.The names and titles of the people who will be attending  the mediation; 
11.Counsel are, of course, encourag ed to exchang e any documents they believe would be
helpful to the resolution of the dispute;
12.Notice to adversary  of any chang e in position regarding  a previous settlement demand or
offer. 
4