7th Judicial District ADR Program  
Eligibility and Application Instructions for  
Mediator for Court Panel  – Civil and Commercial Matters  
 
The 7th Judicial District ADR Program is assembling a Court Panel  of mediators in commercial 
and civil matters pending before the Court.  
 
Eligibility Requirements  
Requirements for Court Panel  membership include compliance with 22 N.Y.C.R.R. Part 146, 
which requires 40 hours of mediation training, consisting of at least 24 hours of mediation skills 
and techniques and at least 16 hours of additional training in the specific mediation techniques 
pertaining to the subject area of the types of cases you are mediating.  The training must be 
sponsored or recognized by the New Y ork State Unified Court System’s Office of Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Programs or training that the Office of Court Administration’s Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Program deems to comport substantively with the curriculum guidelines 
promulgated by tha t office.   
In addition, all Court Panel  Mediators shall have (1) at least ten (10) years of experience as a 
practitioner of law or, for accountants or business professionals, an equivalent level of 
experience; and (2) extensive experience mediating actual cases in the subject area of the types 
of cases to be referred to them. Mediation experience can be achieved by  either (a) mediating at 
least three Court cases in New York State; or (b) completing a Court Mediation Apprenticeship.  
 
A Court  Mediation Apprenticeship shall include (1) observing at least one mediation, regardless 
of case type; (2) co-mediating three Court cases in the subject area of the types of cases to be 
referred to them and debriefing all observations and mediations with a  court Panel  mediator or 
ADR Program Contact; and (3) evaluation by a Court Panel  Mediator , a 7th JD Court Mediator or 
the 7th JD’s ADR Coordinator.  
 
All Court Panel  Mediators must attend six hours of approved Continuing Education relevant to 
mediating in their respective practice areas every two years.  
 
Fulfillment of these requirements does not guarantee acceptance onto the Panel . Final placement 
on a Panel  or continuation on a Panel  is in the discretion of the District Administrative Judge 
under Part 146  of the Rules of the Chief Administrator.  
 
EXCEPTION DUE TO DISRUPTIONS CAUSED BY COVID -19:   
Effective September  1, 2020: Applicants who have not yet completed training in compliance 
with Part 146 may be placed on the Court Roster on a provisional basis for a period of one year.  
Those applicants will be given a grace period until January 31, 2022  by which to obtain  the 
required training and certification in compliance with Part 146 and submit proof thereof to the 7th 
Judicial District ADR Program Administrator.  Upon submission of proof of training and 
certification, the application will be reviewed for a final dete rmination for inclusion on the Court 
Panel . 
 
The OCA Office of ADR Programs will assist with providing resources for some training to 
assist otherwise qualified candidates to obtain the requirements for the Court Roster.  Training 
that has been approved by  OCA ADR can be found at the following links:  
http://www.nycourts.gov/ip/adr/Training.shtml  
http://www.cfsbny .org/programs/mediation/education -and-training.aspx   
Candidates may also contact the ADR Program Administrator prior to registering for a training 
to determine whether a particular training course is approved by OCA ADR to meet the 
requirements of the prog ram.   
 Contact Information  
 Court ADR:  Amy L. DiFranco, Esq.  
   ADR Coordinator, 7th JD 
   adifranc@nycourts.gov  
 
 
Appointment to the Court Panel  is at the discretion of the Administrative Judge of the Seventh 
Judicial District in consultation with the Alternative Dispute Resolution Programs Coordinator 
for the Unified Court System.  Admission will be competitive and will be based on each 
applicant’s training, experience, education and availability to mediate.  Applicants may be 
required to participate in an interview process before a review committee appointed by the 
Administrative Judge.  Applicants may be requested to complete additional training or 
experiential requirements prior to admission to the Panel  if, in the opinion of the review 
committee, the applicant’s mediation training and experience does not fully prepare them for 
mediator status.  
Pursuant to the Rules of the Chief Administrator of the Courts, 22 N.Y.C.R.R. 146.3b, neutrals 
shall be re -designate d to the Court Panel  every two years.  In determining whether to re -
designate any neutral, the neutral must show proof of compliance with the requirement that they 
attend at least six (6) hours of additional approved training relevant to their respective p ractice 
areas every two years pursuant to 22 N.Y.C.R.R. 146.5.  Mediators may also be removed from 
the panel at the discretion of the Administrative Judge in consultation with the Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Programs Coordinator for the Unified Court Sy stem.   
 
To be considered for the Seventh Judicial District Court Panel  for Civil Mediators and/or for 
Commercial Mediators,  the applicant  must  submit  a resume,  which  should  emphasize areas of 
expertise  and include references , and a cover letter highlighting any pertinent information called 
for by this  form. In addition, the applicant is required to complete a Supplement to this 
Application for each Panel  to which the Applicant seeks to admission.  For example:  Supreme 
Court Civil/Commercial Divi sion; Supreme Court Matrimonial; Surrogate’s Court; Foreclosure; 
Family Court; and City Court Landlord/Tenant, Small and Commercial Claims.  
 
Please complete the relevant application(s) and return by email  to: 
Amy L. DiFranco, Esq.  
adr-7jd@nycourts.gov   
7th JD ADR Coordinator and Court Mediator  
Hall of Justice, Room 545  
Rochester, New York  14 614 
 
 
Compensation of Mediators  
Compensation of Mediators : The Seventh Judicial District has establis hed the 
following policies with respect to compensation of mediators:  
 
Mediators shall be required to provide the first hour of 
preparation time at no charge. If necessary, the Mediator may 
charge an additional $150.00 per hour for up to two hours of 
addit ional preparation time for matters which require substantial 
preparation. Mediators shall thereafter receive  no fee for the first 
hour of the initial mediation session. Thereafter, Mediators shall 
receive no more than $3 25.00 per hour for additional time s pent 
in mediation. If the mediation session is cancelled by any party 
less than 48 hours prior to the scheduled mediation session or fails 
to appear at the scheduled mediation session, the cancelling or 
non-appearing party shall be responsible to compensat e the 
Mediator a fee of $250.00.  
 
Mediators shall require that counsel and/or parties sign an 
agreement confirming the terms of retention and compensation in 
advance. Time spent in travel by mediators is not reimbursable 
under this program unless the part ies consent to cover travel costs.  
 
Mediator fees shall be divided equally among all 
separately represented parties, unless otherwise agreed or ordered 
by the Court. Mediator fees shall be paid by the parties within 
fourteen (14) days of the conclusion of mediation.  
 
 
Mediators’ responsibilities may include:  
▪ Coordinating with court staff;  
▪ Managing cases promptly and efficiently;  
▪ Conducting mediation in accordance with the ABA, AAA and ACR Model 
Standards of Conduct for Mediators;  
▪ Preparing med iation agreements and/or disposition forms in a format acceptable 
to the Court; and  
▪ Mentoring apprentice and student mediators.  
  
  