What is m ediation? 
In mediation, a person called a “mediator” helps people in a dispute to communicate with one
another, to understand each other, and if possible, to reach ag reements that satisfy  every one’s
interests.  The mediator does not take sides or decide who was rig ht or wrong  in the past. The
mediators helps people to make their own decisions and focus on the future.
What are the benef its of  mediation? 
Mediation often improves communication, saves time and money , reduces stress, improves
parent-child relationships, and leads to long er-lasting  agreements.  
Can I bring m y attorney?
Yes.1 Attorney s are strong ly encourag ed to prepare clients for mediation sessions, attend
mediation sessions, and assist with drafting  agreements.  You do not need to ag ree to any thing  in
mediation without first speaking  with an attorney .  
How  much w ill m ediation cost?
That depends on the issues and on y ou and the other party .  Mediators on the court roster have
agreed to provide the first 90 minutes of mediation free of charg e.  Some mediation providers
may offer additional, free mediation services to qualify ing couples, others may  offer a sliding  fee
scale.  Community  Dispute Resolution Centers charg e a nominal (small) administrative fee. 
Will the m ediator speak w ith the judge?
No.  Mediation is confidential, with the ex ception of cases involving  child abuse or threat of
imminent harm.  The judg e may ask if y ou were screened  for mediation, to make sure y ou have
had the opportunity  -- if y ou both want it, and if it is appropriate in y our case-- to try  to resolve
1 If you don’t have an attorney, and you qualify for one, the court may assig n you an attorney.  Yo u do not need to
agree to  anything in mediation without first sp eaking with an attorney.  
your dispute out of court.  The judg e or referee may  also ask if y ou are interested in try ing
mediation ag ain at a later stag e in the litig ation process.  
Do I have to go to m ediation?
No.  Mediation is voluntary .  If you do not want to participate, complete the Mediation Opt-Out
Form.  I f you do decide to participate in mediation, y ou may  stop at any  time.    
Should I try m ediation? 
Mediation helps many  people but does not work for every one. Mediation may  not be appropriate
or safe in cases involving  a history  or fear of domestic violence. Mediation may  be inappropriate
if a party  has a sig nificant advantag e in power or control over the other.
What if  I am  afraid or I don't f eel saf e?
In mediation, it is important that y ou feel safe so that y ou can talk openly  with the other person
about y our dispute.  I f you have been hurt or threatened by  the other party , it may  be hard for
you to feel safe enoug h to neg otiate or disag ree.  I n some cases, mediation may  not be a safe
choice.  
How  do I decide if  it is saf e or appropriate f or m e to participate in m ediation?
You are the best judg e of y our own situation.   Has the other person ever:
MPhysically  hurt y ou? Insulted or talked down to y ou?
MThreatened y ou or friends, loved ones, or pets with harm?
MDestroy ed your property ? 
MKept or discourag ed you from seeing  friends or family  members?  
MControlled who y ou see, where y ou go, or what y ou do?  
MIntimidated y ou with g uns, knives, or other weapons?
MLimited access to money  to control y our behavior?
If you answered y es to any  of these questions, mediation may  not be appropriate for y ou.
If you or someone y ou know is in this situation and needs help, visit www.opdv.ny .gov. 
  
How  do I learn m ore about m ediation?
For more information about mediation, see www.ny courts.g ov/adr  or contact y our County  ADR
Prog ram Coordinator