FAMILY CO URT  OF THE STATE OF NE W YORK
PUTNAM  COUNT Y
RULES OF  THE F AMILY COURT- ALTERNATIVE DISP UTE RESOLUTION
PREAMBLE  
It is the policy  of the Courts of this State, as set forth in the State Chief J udge’s
Excellence I nitiative, to encourag e the resolution of disputes and the early  settlement of pending
litigation throug h various settlement procedures. The Putnam County  Family  Court desires to
use mediation as one method of settling  disputes. The benefits to the parties are many  not only
in a saving s of time and money  but also in providing  a result in which all parties benefit. 
The following  Rules shall g overn cases which qualify  for Alternative Dispute Resolution
(“ADR”) throug h mediation.  The Rules set forth herein are intended to apply  in the F amily
Court of Putnam County .  These Rules supplement and shall be applied in tandem with the
Rules of the ADR Prog ram for the Ninth J udicial District (the “Ninth J D Rules”). 
Rule 1: P rogram
Mediation is a voluntary  service offered by  the volunteers of the Dispute Resolution
Center (“DRC”).  Presentl y, volunteers of the DRC make their best efforts to be present during
the  F amily  Court calendars, so that they  are available to ex plain the benefits of mediation and
perform intake in cases where the parties are interested, or the Court orders the intake to take
place.
As detailed herein, mediation is g enerally  utiliz ed in cases involving  custody  and
visitation.  Cases which are appropriately  referred to mediation, and pass the mediation
screening  process, will be desig nated as qualified for mediation.  
Rule 2: Cases Qualif ying f or Mediation and Determ ination of  Suitability
The following  cases g enerally  qualify  for referral to the DRC:
a.Custody  and Visitation cases;
b.PINS cases;
c.Any appropriate cases where parenting  issues are present, as the DRC offers
parent-child mediation. 
The following  cases are determined to be inappropriate for referral to the DRC: 
a.Cases where there is a history  of domestic violence, or where the intake or
screening  process flag s potential ong oing domestic violence that has not been
reported;
1 | Page
b.Cases where there are complete “stay -away ” orders of protection in place;1
c.Abuse and Neg lect cases or similar matters where CPS is investig ating ; 
d.Cases where one party  has a leng thy or violent criminal history .
 
Rule 3: Roster of  Mediators and Com pensation
In Putnam County , family  court mediation is provided by  the DRC.  The DRC is partially
court/state funded, and is staffed by  volunteers.  The parties do not need to pay  for mediation. 
There is a one-time processing  fee of $25.00, which can be waived or reduced in cases of
indig ency.
Parties desirous of retaining  a private mediator are free to do so at their own cost and
expense.  Private mediators selected may  be from the Roster of Mediators for the Court, which
shall be established and maintained by  the Administrative J udge for the Ninth J udicial District.
Continuing  presence on the Roster is subject to review by  the Administrative J udge. Mediators
may be removed from the Roster at the discretion of the Administrative J udge.  The Roster will
be available throug h the Court’s website: www.ny courts.g ov.
Unless otherwise directed by  the Court, the Mediator shall be compensated in accordance
with the Ninth J D Rules, including  those provisions allowing  for ex emptions from parties having
to pay  for mediator compensation and those provisions allowing  for portions of the Mediator’s
time to be non-compensable.
Rule 4: P rocedure and Autom atic Disclosures
With respec t to cases appropriate for mediation, as set forth supra , the Judge will
direct/order parties to participate in the intake phase  of the mediation process.  Wheneve r
possible, intake shall take place in a location in the courthouse desig nated by  the Court.  
When a representative from the DRC is not available in the courtroom, the clerk
generates an intake form with the requisite information the DRC will need to conduct the intake,
and a copy  of this form is fax ed to the DRC.  Additionally , the DRC can perform the intake over
the phone.  
Cases directed to intake will be second-called on the calendar after the intake process has
been completed to notify  the Court whether they  have completed the intake and consent to
1 Certain cases where orders of protection are in place contain only  “refrain from” lang uage and
do not prohibit the parties from being  within a certain distance from one another.  Assuming  the
case is appropriate for mediation, these orders of protection would not prevent the parties from
being  together for purposes of the mediation.  I n cases where there are “stay  away ” orders in
place, the parties can request the Court include an ex ception (where appropriate based on the
facts of the case) in the order of protection to allow the parties to be in the same room for
purposes of the mediation.  However, many  cases that warrant the Court to issue a “stay  away ”
order may  not be appropriate for mediation.  
2 | Page
proceeding  with the nex t phase of the mediation process.  I f so, the parties proceed to screening
and scheduling  of mediation.  I f not, the J udge hears the case in court as scheduled. 
Once a case has proceeded throug h the screening  process,  and is determined appropriate
for Mediation, the mediation session(s) are scheduled with a volunteer from the DRC.  The
parties shall provide the mediator with the initiating  petition and any other documents deemed
relevant to the matter being mediated.  If the mediator requests any additional documentati on or
information, the parties shall comply  with the request of the mediator to the extent practicab le. 
The screening  and the actual mediation sessions take place at the DRC offices, located in close
proximity  to the Courthouse.  
In cases that are going forward with screening  and mediation, the Court will schedule the
next appearance date approx imately  30-45 days out, based on the Court’s schedule.2  The Court
will be notified by the DRC of cases where the parties do not show up to their scheduled
mediation, or after a full screening  are deemed not eligible/appropriate for mediation, so that the
return date can be advanced, as the Court deems necessary .  
Additionally , the DRC will notify  the Court of cases that are successfully  mediated, so
that the cases can be removed from the Court’s calendar, and the agreements can be “so
ordered” if the parties or their attorney s request.  The family  court clerks will keep track  of the
number of cases ordered to proceed to intake, and the number of cases that proceed to screening
and meditation, along  with the numbers of cases that are/are not successfully  mediated after
completion of the process described herein.    
Rule 5: Continuation of  Mediation af ter the 45-Day P eriod
According  to the DRC, nearly  all cases that proceed to mediation are resolved within one
to two sessions of 60-90 minutes each.  However, if the matter is not entirely  resolved within the
45-day  period as provided in the Ninth JD rules, but the parties and the Mediator believe that it
would be beneficial if the mediation process  were to continue, the process may go forward, but
in such event, there shall be no extension or stay of the proceeding s unless otherwise provided
by the Ninth J D Rules or leave is g ranted by  a Justice of the Court.
    Rule 6: Adm inistration of  Program
The Prog ram shall be supervised and coordinated by  the Court Attorney  for the presiding
Judge assig ned to the case, who shall act as the Administrator for the implementation of
ADR/mediation for that case.  
2 Keep in mind, the Putnam County  Family  Court J udges are multi-hat judg es, and usually
family  court calendars are only  scheduled one or two day s a week.  
3 | Page