SUPREME COURT OF  THE STATE OF  NEW  YORK
COUNTY OF  ORANGE
It is the policy  of the Courts of the State of New York, as set forth in the State Chief Judge’s
Excellence Initiative, to encourag e the resolution of disputes and the early  settlement of pending
litigation throug h various settlement procedures.  Court ordered mediation is new to Orang e County . 
Court  personnel and local private mediators are limited in number. For this reason, the cases initially
directed to mediation shall be of limited type.  It is the intent to expand the program with the increase
in availability  of trained court personnel  and local mediators. 
The following  shall govern cases filed in the Supreme Court, Orange County  and shall be
implemented together with an individual judg es Part Rules.  These Rules are also to be applied in
concert with the Rules of the Ninth J udicial District Alternative Dispute  Resolution Prog ram.
1. Prog ram Description:
Cases commenced in Orang e County  Supreme Court  shall be directed to  mediation unless
otherwise directed by the individual judge.  Cases shall be directed for  mediation at the preliminary
conference.   An order shall be issued identify ing the mediator; specify ing the issue or issues to be
addressed, and outlining  a limited time frame for completion of the mediation.   The mediator shall
advise counsel of the date, time and place of mediation.   The mediator may direct the parties to
appear for multiple mediation sessions as he or she deems necessary .
The assig ned judge shall enter a date for  status conference after the completion of mediation. 
The mediator shall issue a report  to the judge giving  the status of the mediation and may request a
further round of mediation to be g ranted upon approval of  the judg e.
2.  Cases Qualify ing for Mediation and Time F rames:
The types of cases which will be directed to mediation are listed below.  It is anticipated that this list
will be modified to include other case types as the program progresses and the number of trained
mediators increase.
Subrog ation: All cases.
Mediation will be complete within 60 day s of preliminary  conference
Contract : Cases seeking  less than $50,000.
Mediation will be completed within 45 and 120 days of preliminary
conference.
Matrimonial:   Cases involving  W-2 employ ees with issues of  maintenance; child support; 
           and equitable  distribution.  Cases where custody is resolved may be
included.  Cases involving  contested custody  or domestic violence will be 
not be included.
Mediation will be completed within 45 and 90 day s of preliminary
conference
Post judg ment
Matrimonial: All cases ex cept those involving  contempt applications.
Mediation will be completed within 30 and 60 day s of initial appearance.
Personal 
Injury : Cases with no insurance or minimal policies ($25,000/$50,000)
Mediation will be completed within 60 and 90 day s of initial appearance.
3.   Disclosure:
Standards and Goals time lines are not tolled by mediation.  For this reason, discovery  shall
continue  while preparing  for and participating  in mediation. Discovery  schedules shall be set at the
preliminary /initial conference with due dates to be determined by  the assig ned judg e.
Copies of documents as indicated below shall be forwarded to the mediator at least 20 days
prior to the first mediation.  If the case is e-filed and the mediator is a member of the court system,
copies of any e-filed docume nt need not be provided.   Additional documents will be produced at
the request of the mediator.
Subrog ation: Summons and complaint;  answer; applicable insurance policy , if any;         
            invoices.
Contract : Summons and complaint; answer; contract  or  documents claimed to
establish a contract; proof of insurance, if relevant; proof of calculation of
damag es
Matrimonial: Summons and complaint; answ er; Net Worth Statement with statutory
attachments; F amily  Court orders, if any .
Post judg ment
Matrimonial: Motion and/or Order to Show Cause with Attachments; Judgement of
Divorce with incorporated separation agreement or stipulation of settlement;
any documents which serve as proof of the alleg ed violation. 
Personal 
Injury : Summons and comp laint; answer; applicable insurance policies; medical
records.
4.  Roster of Mediators:
Court personnel who have appropriate training  shall serve as mediators for all types of cases.
The Dispute resolution Center shall be directed to provide mediators for subrog ation;
matrimonial and post judg ment matrimonial cases.
The Administrative Judge for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and maintain a Roster
of Mediators.  Requirements  to qualify for placement on the roster are set forth in 22
NYCRR 146.  Part 146 requires prospective mediators to have successfully  completed forty
(40) hours of training  in an OCA sponsored or approved training  program.  The training  must
include 24 hours of training  in basic mediation skills and techniques and 16 hours of training
in a specific mediation techniques pertaining  to the subject area of the types of cases referred
to them.  (Part 146.4) Additionally , each mediator must also have recent experience
mediating  actual cases in the  relevant subject area.  (Part 146.4) Procedure for placement on
the roster will be provided.
The number of mediators assig ned to a particu lar case shall be determined  at  the
preliminary  conference.
In matrimonial and post matrimonial matters, the cost of private mediators shall be shared 
proportionate to income.
In subrog ation , contract and personal injury  matters, cost of private mediators shall be shared 
equally .
5.  Settlement Day s with I nsurers
Judges, at their option, may participate in Settlement Days whic h will be held at least
quarterly .  After the filing  of the note of issue, the court shall desig nate those cases felt to be
appropriate for participation.   
Settlement days shall involve plaintiff and defense counsel; plaintiff;  claims adjusters and
judge.
A judge who chooses not to personally participate may direct any case he or she deems
appropriate post note of issue.
6.   ADR Coordinator:
Each Part shall desig nate an individual to serve as ADR Coordinator for the part. That person
shall be identified in the Part Rules and shall serve as the contact person for questions on the
mediation process.