1   3RD  JUDICIAL DISTRICT  
DISTRICT -WIDE PRESUMPTIVE ADR PROGRAM  RULES  
 
I. OVERVIEW  
 
Proceedings in the civil parts of the Third  Judicial District are eligible for presumptive Alternative 
Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) . The following Rules shall govern all cases referred to this P rogram.  
This Program does not preclude the Court from directing or referring parties to ADR, including 
settlement conferences  or early neutral evaluations  without fee with Court Attorney -Referees at the 
3rd Judicial Distr ict Office  or through a retained Neutral of the Parties choice.  
 
 
II. STATEMENT OF  PURPOSE  
 
The Third  Judicial District is dedicated to fulfilling its statutory and constitutional mandate to 
ensure the just and efficient resolution of all matters that come before it. Th is plan has been 
developed to achieve these ends through early referral to ADR  which is  often faster, more 
convenient, less expensive, and less acrimonious . An ADR resolution often results in a more 
mutually acceptable and durable resolution than th at obtained through  litigation.  
 
 
III. DEFINITIONS  
Alternative Dispute Resolution  (ADR): A variety of processes that help parties resolve their claim, 
conflict or dispute without a trial. Types of ADR include, but is not limited to, Mediation, Neutral 
Evaluation and Arbitration.    
Neutral : A third party, usually an attorney, who works  with the parties in the ADR process in a 
neutral capacity to help resolve their dispute.    
 
Mediation : A confidential dispute resolution process in which a neutral third party - the Mediator 
- helps parties identify issues, clarify perceptions and explore  options for a mutually acceptable 
outcome. In this process, parties have an opportunity to communicate with each other, focus on 
what is important to them, and to come up with individually tailored  solutions. During mediation, 
each party relates his or he r understanding of the dispute. The Mediator may ask the parties 
clarifying questions. The Mediator will not give legal advice or force solutions  on the parties.  
 
Mediation often involves non -legal as well as legal issues. Parties are strongly encouraged t o 
participate in mediation with their own attorneys. Parties may also choose to attend sessions without 
counsel, if all participants agree. Although the mediation process can, and often does, result in an 
agreement, whether to reach an agreement, and on wh at terms, is up to the parties themselves.  
 
 
2  Mediator : A trained third party neutral. The Mediator is not a decision -maker. The Mediator 
serves as a neutral facilitator of communication and helps the parties reach resolution of the 
issue(s) being mediated. In this document, Mediator may also refer to a co -mediation team where 
two (or more) such neutrals are working together to mediate a case. For the purpose of these 
rules, a Mediator is a neutral who has fulfilled the requirements of Part 146 of the Rules of the 
Chief Administrative Judge and is mediating a g iven case pursuant to these program rules. This 
is distinct from private mediators who mediate cases outside these program rules.  
Neutral Evaluation : Neutral evaluation is an ADR process where the case is referred to an expert, 
usually an attorney, who is asked to provide a balanced and unbiased evaluation of the dispute. Early 
Neutral Evaluation (ENE) may take place soon after a case has been filed in court. If this process 
occurs early, it may be referred to as Early Neutral Evaluation. Regardless, a cour t may refer the 
case to ENE or the parties may mutually agree to this process. The parties either submit written 
comments or meet in person with the expert. The expert identifies each side’s strengths and 
weaknesses and provides an evaluation of the likely  outcome of a trial. This evaluation can assist the 
parties in assessing their case and may propel them towards a settlement. Often, the expert’s opinion 
may be of great significance to one or more parties as it may serve to confirm the evaluation of the 
case by that party’s attorney.  
Arbitration : Arbitration is a process where disputing parties agree that one or several individuals , the 
arbitrator (s), can make a decision about the dispute after receiving evidence and hearing arguments. 
Arbitration is different from mediation because the arbitrator has the authority to make a decision 
about the dispute. The process may be similar to a trial in that the parties make opening statements 
and present evidence to the arbitrator; however, it is usually less formal and is often faster. 
Arbitration may be binding or non -binding, which depends on either an agreement between the 
parties or any applicable law in this area, depending on the jurisdiction involved. In binding 
arbitration, parties agree t o accept the arbitrator’s decision as final. In non -binding arbitration, the 
parties may request a trial if they don’t accept the arbitrator’s decision.  
Community Dispute Resolution Center  (hereinafter, "CDRC") : The New York State Unified Court 
System part ners with local non -profit organizations known as CDRC ’s to provide mediation and 
other dispute resolution options as an alternative to court. CDRC ’s help litigants resolve a wide 
range of family court disputes involving parents and children as  well as chi ld custody and visitation  
issues.  CDRC’s can also be utilized in mediating Surrogate’s Court dis putes such as Accountings , 
Administration and  Probate  disputes  that are largely driven by family dynamics.  A list of the 3rd 
Judicial Districts CDRC’s, and the  counties they serve, can be found at 
http://ww2.nycourts.gov/ip/adr/MedDirectory.shtml  
 
District ADR Coordinator : A person or entity designated by the Administrative Judge for t he Third  
Judicial District to have general program oversight.   
 
 
IV. PROCEDURES  
 
A. ADR  Initiation  Process  
3   
1. The referral to ADR  should  take place at the Preliminary Conference unless  a 
different time frame is provided for by the specific court in the County where 
the action or proceeding is  brought.  
2. If any Party seeks an exemption from ADR , the Court  shall determine in its 
discretion whether good cause exists to grant  same.  
3. If any Party seeks an exemption from the fee component of ADR b ased on indigent 
status pursuant to New York Civil Practice Law and Rules § 1101, the Court  shall 
make a determination on such request, with the understanding that the non-
indigent party shall sti ll be responsible for their own portion of the Mediator's  fee. 
4. Once the Court  determines that the case qualifies for ADR , the Court  shall issue 
an Order of Reference either selecting a Roster Neutral or the applicable CDRC.   
 
B. Order of Reference:  
 
1.        The Court shall:  
 
a.   refer matters to a Roster Neutral or a CDRC by issuing an Order of 
Reference  informing parties  and their counsel that the case shall undergo 
Mediation , which shall be completed within 60 days of issuance of the Order of 
Reference, or at the discretion of the Court, set a different time frame; and  
 
b. establish a date thereafter upon which to return to Court.  
 
 
V. SELECTION OF  NEUTRAL /CDRC   
 
A.  The list of Neutrals and CDRC’s serving the 3rd Judicial District can be found at   
http://ww2.nycourts.gov/ip/adr/MedDirectory.shtml  The Court shall list the Neutral in the 
Order of Reference, provide a copy to the parties, and send the Order of Reference to the 
ADR Coordinator at claquida@nycourts.gov .  
 
B. The ADR Coordinator will then contact the Neutral, confirm there is no conflict, and 
provide the Neutral with a copy of the Order of Reference.   
 
4  C. If either party believes  that there is a conflict of interest  with the Neutral  selected by the 
Court , the objecting party must submit a written request to the Court  within five (5) days 
from the date of notification of the selected Neutral  that includes the basis for 
disqualification of the Neutral . The Court may select an alternati ve Neutral  or deny the  
request.   If the Court finds a basis for disqualification, it will issue a new Order of 
Reference, notify the parties of the alternate Neutral  and provide a copy of the new Order 
of Reference to the ADR Coordinator.     
 
D. Co-mediation may occur as part of an apprentice program when one Mediator is 
mentoring another. Co -mediation may also occur when two Mediators are appointed to 
the case. Apprentice mediators' time is non -compensable, whereas a Co -mediator's time 
is compens able, but with the understanding that Co -mediators will split the fee that 
would otherwise be payable to a single Mediator under these  Rules.  
 
E. The Roster shall include Neutrals or mediation service providers who agree to provide  
reduced -fee neutral servic es to qualified participants.  
 
F. Neutrals on court rosters shall list, among other information, their relevant biographical 
information, experience, areas of expertise, any language fluency they  possess and 
whether they have the capability to conduct ADR rem otely.  
  
 
VI. THE ADR  PROCESS  
 
A. Client Preparation: Counsel shall prepare for their case to be referred to ADR  by: 
 
1. Informing their clients about the ADR program and its  expectations and 
requirements.  
2. Identifying the information and material that may be useful to exchange with  other 
parties in advance of ADR, including any information required to be exchanged by 
any discovery protocol prescribed by the Court.   
 
B. Pre-ADR  Memoranda: Within three (3) business days of the scheduled mediation t he 
parties sh ould provide to the Neutral a three  page -limited confidential memorandum 
setting forth their view as to the facts, the issues that are in dispute, suggestions as to how 
the matter might be resolved, as well as such other information concerning the litigation 
as the Neutral  deems necessary for the effective negotiation and resolution of the issues. 
If a party feels that a memorandum to the Neutral needs to be longer than three pages 
based on the complexity of the case (i.e., commercial claims) they should make a request 
to the Neutral to provide a longer memorandum. No portion of the confidential 
memorandum shall be disclosed to the Court, nor, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, 
to any other party to the proceeding. Any departure from the requirements set f orth herein 
may be authorized by the Court  or the  Neutral . 
 
C. Pre-ADR  Conference Calls: The Neutral  may request a conference call regarding any 
5  preliminary matters and may thereafter meet or speak privately with any party and their 
respective counsel prior to or during a n ADR  session.  
 
D. Location of ADR  Sessions: The initial ADR session  and any subsequent session s should take 
place at the Neutral’s  office, unless a different location i s agreed to by the Neutral and the 
parties .  Any alternate location mu st permit the effective conduct of the ADR process and 
preserve confidentiality and safety.  The Neutral can provide ADR services remotely at their 
discretion.   
 
E. Informed Consent: At the beginning of the initial session, the Neutral  shall:  
 
1. Explain to all parties that all communications are governed by the 
confidentiality provisions of these  Rules.  
 
2. Explain that any party may, during the initial session or at any time thereafter,  end 
the ADR process and return to Court.  
 
3. Request that all parties acknowledge in writing that they were informed of and 
understand the voluntary and confidential nature of the ADR process. An ADR 
Participation Statement of Understanding shall be sent by the Neutral to the Parties 
after the Neutra l selection has been confirmed.   
 
F. Caucus: At any point in the process either party, their counsel, or the Neutral may suggest 
meeting separately with the Neutral in caucus. During the caucus, the Neutral may 
explore how that party views the dispute and the impact of any proposed solutions. The 
Neutral shall keep confidential the information discussed in caucus unless the party 
permits  disclosure.  
 
G. Time to Complete ADR: Unless otherwise permitted by the Court, the parties shall 
complete the ADR process wi thin sixty (60) days of issuance of the Order of   Reference.  
 
H. Neutral Report: Within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the ADR session(s), 
the Neutral shall send a Report  ("ADR Report") to the ADR Coordinator  that states:  
 
1. The date of the initial session and whether each party and counsel appeared at the 
initial session;  
 
2. The dates of any subsequent session (s) that were held, and whether each party 
and counsel appeared at the subsequent session(s) ; and  
 
3. Whether the parties s ettled, did not settle, or settled a portion of the issues in dispute 
(describing the issues that were resolved).   
 
4. The ADR Coordinator will then forward the “ADR Report” to the assigning Court.  
 
6  I. ADR Survey: Following the conclusion of ADR, Parties and counsel are strongly 
encouraged to  complete an ADR Survey and return it promptly to the ADR Coordinator . 
The survey is meant to track participant satisfaction and shall not include any details of 
the substance of the case or  mediation.  
 
 
VII. FEES AND NEUTRAL  COMPENSATION  
 
A. The Court itself does not charge or administer fees for  ADR.  
 
B. CDRC services are offered for a nominal administrative fee or the non -profit’s sliding scale 
depending on the type of case and services provided.  
 
C. ADR  Sessions : Court Roster Neutrals shall not be compensated for the first ninety (90) 
minutes of the initial ADR  session under the Plan . Neutrals  shall also not be compensated 
under the Plan for preparation time or administrat ive tasks  leading up to the first 90 -
minute ADR  session.   Should the parties agree to continue  ADR  beyond the initial 90 -
minute free period, the Neutral  shall be entitled to compensation as follows:  compensable 
services shall consist of time spent conducting any ADR  session that follows the initial 
free 90 -minute session and the time spent reviewing materials submitted by the parties for 
purposes of subs equent ADR  sessions.  The Neutral’s  fees for such service shall not 
exceed $350.00/hour  and be split evenly between the parties unless otherwise agreed to.  
Unless otherwise provided in these rules or agreed upon by the parties in writing, the 
Neutral’s fe e structure  shall be as set forth in the Plan's Neutral Fee  Agreement.  
 
D. Neutral Fee Agreement: At or any time prior to the beginning of the initial ADR session, 
the parties, counsel and the Neutral shall enter into a Neutral Fee Agreement, which shall 
be in the form accompanying these Rules, except as otherwise agreed  to in wr iting by the 
parties, counsel, and the  Neutral . 
 
E. Neutrals  are encouraged to use a sliding scale where appropriate.   
 
F. Any party may elect not to continue with ADR, which decision must be immediately 
communicated orally or in writing to the Neutral and all parties. In such situation, 
despite the fact that one or more parties have opted out, ADR can continue as to those 
parties desiring to continue to the extent that ADR can be meaningful without 
participation by the party or parties that opted  out. 
 
G. Co-Mediation: When a case is co -mediated by two appointed Court Roster Neutrals, the 
Neutrals shall split the set hourly  rate. 
 
 
VIII.  PARTICIPATING IN  ADR  
 
A. Party Participation: Parties are strongly encouraged to attend all ADR sessions. The  
7  Neutral   has the discretion to allow remote participation in the ADR process.   
 
B. Attorney Participation: Parties are strongly encouraged to participate in the ADR process 
with counsel.  
 
C. Non-Party Participation: If a non -party is invited to participate in the ADR pr ocess, which 
participation must be agreed to by the parties and the Neutral, the Neutral shall obtain the 
participating non -party's written consent as to confidentiality and any other matters 
requested  by the parties, as facilitated by the  Neutral.  
 
D. Opting -Out: A case otherwise subject to ADR may be exempted from such process upon 
a showing of good cause. A party seeking an exemption shall apply for leave  of Court to 
be exempted. Failure to seek an exemption in this manner shall constitute a waiver of any 
objection to the ADR referral. If the court grants leave to "opt out" from referral to ADR, 
then the case shall not proceed to ADR at that time.  
 
E. Compliance: Failure to comply with these rules may subject the offending party or 
attorney to sanctions, including but not limited to sanctions under CPLR 3126 and 22 
NYCRR 130. 
 
 
IX. CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
A. ADR with a Court Roster Neutral shall be confidential and, except as otherwise provided, 
any document prepared, or communications made, by parties, their counsel or a Neutral 
for, during, or in connection with the proceeding shall not be disclosed outside its confines 
by any participant. No party to the proceeding shall, during the action referred to ADR or 
in any other legal matter, seek to compel production of documents, notes, or other writings 
prepared for or generated in connection with the ADR process , or the testimony of any 
other party or the Neutral concerning communications made during the proceeding. A 
settlement, in whole or in part, reached during ADR shall be set forth in a writing signed 
by all parties affected or their duly authorized agents.  Documents and information 
otherwise discoverable under New York Law shall not be shielded from disclosure merely 
because they are submitted  or referred to in ADR.  
 
B. Notwithstanding these confidentiality provisions, communications and information may 
be sub ject to disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding in 
any of the following  circumstances:  
 
1. Attendance: Whether the parties and their counsel attended the initial session will 
be reported to the Court. 
 
2. Session Information: The Neutral may report to the Court whether the parties are 
requesting additional ADR sessions as well as the date of any ADR  session.  
8   
3. Waiver: Parties to ADR and the Neutral may agree to waive confidentiality. The 
waiver must specify the individual communication(s) or  information that will be 
disclosed, the person or entity to whom the disclosure will be made, and the 
purpose of the disclosure. All waivers shall be in  writing.  
 
4. Written Agreement: A writing signed by all the parties emb odying a  negotiated 
agreement submitted to the Court for review. Only those signed agreements that 
have become court orders or decrees may be admissible in any present or future 
judicial or administrative  proceeding.  
 
5. Threats of Imminent, Serious Harm: If a communication or  information  constitutes 
a credible threat of serious and imminent harm, either to the speaker or another person or 
entity, the appropriate authorities and/or the potential victim may be notified.  
 
6. Allegations of Child Abuse or Neglect: If a communication or information relates 
to an allegation of child abuse or neglect as defined in Family Court Act § 1012(e) 
and (f) and Social Services Law § 412, and for which disclosure is required pursuant 
to Socia l Services Law § 413, appropriate authorities may be  notified.  
 
7. Neutral Survey: The Neutral survey may be disclosed to the presiding Judge, 
Administrative Judge or applicable ADR Coordinator as set forth above, including 
for purposes of determining whether  to re-certify a Neutral to a Roster or whether 
to remove a Neutral from a Roster.  
 
8. Unprofessional Conduct: A party, counsel to a party, or the Neutral, may report to 
an appropriate disciplinary body any unprofessional conduct engaged in by the 
Neutral or counsel to a party.  
 
9. Collection of Fees: The Neutral may make general references to the fact of the 
ADR services rendered in any action to collect an unpaid, author ized fee for 
services performed under these Rules.  
 
 
X. NEUTRAL EVALUATORS/MEDIATORS  
 
A. Qualifications  
 
1. The Administrative Judge shall establish, and the District ADR Coordinator shall 
maintain, a roster of trained Neutrals ("The Roster") for the Program which shall be 
available on the applicable Court website within the District. To be eligible to join 
the Roster as a Neutral Evaluator and/or a Mediator, a person shall satisfy the 
training and experience requirements of Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief 
Administrative Judge as  follows:  
 
9  1. Neutral Evaluation :  Neutral evaluators who wish to qualify for appointment 
to the 3rd Judicial District court roster must have successfully completed at 
least six (6) hours of approved training in procedural and ethical matters 
related to neutral evaluation and be:  
 
i. Admitted to practice law for at least five (5) year s who also have at 
least five (5) years of substantial experience in the subject area of the 
cases that will be referred to them; or  
 
ii. Individuals who have served at least five (5) years as a judge with 
substantial experience in the specific subject area of  the cases that 
will be referred to them.    
 
iii. All neutra l evaluators  must attend at least six (6) hours of additional 
approved training relevant to their respective practice areas every two 
(2) years.   
 
iv. Effective January 1, 2023, all neutral evaluators mu st complete at 
least two (2) hours of qualifying anti -bias training every two years.  
Note: neutral evaluators may apply two (2) hours of their anti -bias 
training towards the six (6) hours of continuing education 
requirements listed in para iii above.   
 
2. Mediators :      Mediators must have successfully completed at least forty (40) 
hours of approved training as follows:   
 
i. At least twenty -four (24) hours of training in basic mediation skills 
and techniques; and  
 
ii. At least sixteen (16) hours of additional training in the specific 
mediation techniques pertaining to the subject area of the types of 
cases referred to them.  
 
iii. Mediators must also have recent experience mediating actual cases in 
the subject area of the types of cases referred to them.   
 
iv. All mediators must attend at least six (6) hours of additional approved 
training relevant to their respective practice areas every two (2) years.  
 
v. Effective January 1, 2023, all mediators must complete at least two (2) 
hours of qualifying anti -bias trai ning every two years.  Note: 
mediators may apply two (2) hours of their anti -bias training towards 
the six (6) hours of continuing education requirements listed in para iv 
above.   
 
vi. Effective January 1, 2023, mediators who mediate matrimonial or 
10  family mat ters must take an additional four (4) hours of approved 
training on how to screen for Intimate Partner Violence. After 
completing this one -time four (4) hour training, mediators must take 
at least two (2) hours of continuing education on Intimate Partner 
Violence every two years.  Note: These continuing education hours 
may be applied towards the six (6) hours of continuing education 
requirements listed in para iv above.   
 
3. Persons who serve as both mediators and neutral evaluators in the   same matter 
must meet the qualifications and training specified above.   
 
4. Fulfillment of these requirements does not guarantee acceptance onto the Roster. 
Final placement on a Roster or co ntinuation on a Roster is in the discretion of the 
District Administrative Judge under Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief 
Administrator.  
 
B. Immunity  
 
1. The Neutral shall be immune from suit as a result of any conduct or omission 
made during performance of duties in that official capacity to the extent 
permissible by law and shall be held harmless and indemnified against any costs 
incurred by the Neutral i n connection with any claim based on such actions or 
omissions to the extent permitted by applicable law, including Public Officer's 
Law Section  17. 
 
C. Avoiding Conflicts of  Interest:  
 
1. Before accepting an appointment as a Neutral, and within 72 hours of being 
contacted for possible retention to serve as a Neutral under these Rules, the Neutral 
shall make an inquiry that is reasonable under the circumstances to determine 
whether there are  any known facts that a reasonable individual would consider likely 
to affect the impartiality of the Neutral, including a financial or personal interest in 
the outcome, or an existing or past relationship with a party or their attorneys or 
foreseeable par ticipant in the ADR process. If the Neutral wishes to accept an 
appointment after discovering a potentially disqualifying fact, the Neutral shall 
disclose the disqualifying fact to the parties and shall not serve unless the parties 
consent thereto in writi ng. If, after accepting a case, a Neutral learns of any 
disqualifying fact, the Neutral shall disclose  it to the parties as soon as practicable. If 
such conflict is not waived by the parties, or if such conflict might reasonably be 
viewed as undermining th e integrity of the ADR process, the Neutral shall withdraw 
and notify the parties , the Court  and the ADR Coordinator.   
 
D. Quality  Assurance  
 
11  1. The District ADR Coordinator shall develop and promulgate consistent  practices for 
ensuring Neutral quality and fitn ess. Such practices may include, but are not limited 
to: 
 
1. Observing Neutrals  periodically;  
 
2. Providing and/or requiring continuing education relevant t o serving as a 
Neutral in a case;  
 
3. Debriefing cases with  Neutrals . 
 
2. Any Roster Neutral or prospective Neutral may be observed at any time by  the 
District ADR Coordinator or staff of the NYS Unified Court System's Statewide 
ADR Office, before appointment on the Roster or to remain on the Roster.  
 
E. Neutral Standards of Conduct  
 
1. Neutrals on court a pproved rosters must adhere to Standards of Conduct to be 
established or adopted by the Office of Court Administration in conducting their 
ADR session(s).  
 
F. Forms referenced in these rules can be found on the 3rd JD ADR webpage.   
 
XI. DISTRICT ADR COORDINATOR  
 
A. The District ADR Coordinator shall oversee the administrative requirements of the 
Program, which includes but is not limited  to: 
 
1. Monitoring all proceedings referred to  ADR ; 
 
2. Providing information to the Court on the status of cases referred to  ADR ; 
 
3. Maintaining statistical data on the  Program.  
 
B. Carmelo Laquidara, Esq.  
ADR Coordinator for the Third Judicial District  
2500 Pond View, Suite 210  
Castleton -on-Hudson, NY 12033  
claquida@nycourts.g ov 
518-285-8300 
 
 
____________________________________  
Honorable  Gerald W. Connolly  
Administrative Judge, Third Judicial Distric t
12   