City Cour t Mediation Program
9th Judicial District
STATEMENT OF PROCEDURES 
PREA MBLE
 
It is the policy of the Court s of this State, as set forth in the State Chief
Judge’s  Excellenc e Initiative, to encourage the resolution of disputes and
the early  settlement  of pending litigation through various  settlement
procedures . The 9th JD City Court s desires to use mediat ion as one
method of settling disputes. The benef its to the parties are many , not only
in a savings of time and money , but also in providing a result in which all
parties benef it. The follow ing Rules  shall govern cases which qualif y for
Alternat ive Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) through presumpt ive mediat ion and
optional mediat ion.  The Rules  set forth herein are intended to apply  in the
9th JD City Court s.  Thes e Rules supplement  and shall be applied in
tandem with the Rules  of the Alternat ive Dispute Resolution Program for
the Ninth Judicial District (the “Nint h JD Rules ”).  Capit alized terms  to the
extent not defined herein are as defined in the Ninth JD Rules .
Rule 1. Program:
The 9th JD City Court s, employ s the Alternat ive Dispute Resolution
Program instituted by the Ninth Judicial District.  Unles s otherw ise direc ted
by the Court , cases referred to the Program shall be mediat ed.  A roster of
private mediat ors has been established for this purpos e and, in addit ion,
one Court  Attorney  Referee trained in mediat ion.  Cases which qualif y for
referral to the Program shall be those cases that have been designat ed by
the Court  as qualif ying for presumpt ive mediat ion, as ident ified in Rule 2
herein,  as well as any cases where all parties have elected to pursue
mediat ion, and any cases where the Court has exercised its discretion to
refer the cases to mediat ion.  
Rule 2. Cases Qual ifying for Presum ptive Mediation and
Deter mination of Suitability:
Listed below  are those cases which have been designat ed as qualif ying for
presumpt ive mediat ion.  All such cases shall be referred to mediat ion
utilizing the procedures  and forms  established by the Ninth JD Rules . 
Those forms  enable parties and/or their couns el to ident ify whether their
case qualif ies for mediat ion. The Court  will review such forms  to confirm
that the case does  qualif y, in which event the mediat ion shall be initiated,
and an Order of Referenc e issued in accordanc e with the Ninth JD Rules . 
The follow ing cases are deemed to qualif y for presumpt ive mediat ion:
(i) PRESUMPTI VE MEDI ATION
1. Regular Civil Claims  seeing money  damages  in excess of
$6,000
2. Any case where the parties reques t mediat ion
(ii) EXCLUSI ON FROM MEDI ATION
Actions involving allegat ions of domes tic violenc e or a severe power
imbalanc e between the parties and/or where temporary  or permanent
Orders  of Protection have been issued are not appropriat e for referral to
the Program.   Cases will be screened to avoid inappropriat e referrals .
Rule 3.  REFERRA L TO THE PROGRA M AND ONGOI NG LITIGATION:
Cases may  be referred to Mediat ion at anytime including the preliminary
conferenc e (which is typically when referrals  are made).   A party who
attends  the initial session complies  with the Order of Referenc e, even if
that party ultimately choos es not to proceed with mediat ion.
Referral to the Program will not stay the court proceedings  in any respect. 
The “no stay” policy recogniz es the special need for prompt  action in city
court proceedings .  
Rule 4. Roster  of Mediators and Com pensati on:
The Adminis trative Judge for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and
maint ain a Roster of Mediat ors for the City Court s (“the Roster”).
(i) In order to be eligible to serve as a Mediat or and be listed on the
Roster, a person shall possess the follow ing qualif ications and such
others as may hereaf ter be promulgat ed:  (a) A mediat or must have
complet ed at leas t 40 hours  of civil mediat ion training in a training
program recogniz ed by the New York State Office of Court
Adminis tration ("OCA" );(b) Recent experienc e mediat ing actual
cases in the subjec t area of the types of cases referred to them; (c)
comply  with the Ninth Judicial District’s  Standards  of Conduc t for
Mediat ors. 
(ii) Cont inuing presence on the Roster is subjec t to review by the
Adminis trative Judge.  Mediat ors may  be remov ed from the Roster at
the discretion of the Adminis trative Judge.
(iii) The Roster will be available through the Court’s website
(www.nycourts.gov).
(iv)Unles s otherw ise direc ted by the Court , the Mediat or shall be
compens ated in accordanc e with the Ninth JD Rules , including those
provisions allow ing for exempt ions from parties having to pay for
mediat or compens ation and those provisions allow ing for portions of
the Mediat or’s time to be non-c ompens able.
Rule 5. Optional Non-Roster  Mediation:
In the discretion of the court  and where available a referral to mediat ion
shall be made to any of the follow ing:
(i) A mediat ion trained Court  Attorney  Referee or Judicial Hearing
Officer
(ii) A Communit y Dispute Resolution Cent er
(iii) Private Mediat or
Rule 6. Pre-Mediation Disclosur e
(i)Unles s otherw ise direc ted by the Mediat or, at least ten days before the
first mediat ion session, each party shall deliver to the Mediat or a copy
of that party’s mark ed pleadings  (including respons ive pleadings )
together with a pre-mediat ion memorandum in the form set forth in the
Ninth JD Rules .   Except as otherw ise agreed,  this memorandum shall
not be served on the adversary or filed in Court , shall be read only by
the Mediat or, and shall be destroyed by the Mediat or immediat ely
upon complet ion of the mediat ion.
(ii)Unles s otherw ise agreed by the parties and the Mediat or, or as
direc ted by the Mediat or, within ten days of the filing of the Order of
Referenc e pursuant to the Ninth JD Rules , the parties shall exchange
informat ion as direc ted by the Mediat or. 
Rule 7. Conti nuation of Mediation after  Expi ration of the 45-Day
Period:
If the matter has not been entirely resolved within the 45-day  period as
provided in the Ninth JD Rules , but the parties and the Mediat or
believ e that it would be benef icial if the mediat ion process were to
continue,  the process may go forward, but in such event, there shall be
no extension or stay of the proceedings  unles s otherw ise provided by
the Ninth JD Rules or leave is grant ed by a Judge of the Court .
Rule 8. Further Mediation:
After complet ion of the mediat ion, or upon reques t of a party or upon
its own initiative, the Judge,  may issue an order direc ting a second
referral to the Program.  Any such referral shall be entertained and
ordered as early  as practicable and shall be adminis tered in
accordanc e with these and the Ninth JD Rules.  
Rule 9. Administration of Program: 
The Program shall be superv ised and coordinat ed by the Chief  Clerk  of the
City Court  who shall act as the Adminis trator for the implement ation of
ADR for that case.