ORANGE C OUNTY FAM ILY C OUR T
MEDIATION AND ALTER NATIVE DISPUTE R ESOLUTION PR OGR AM
  
PREAMBLE and OVERVIEW
The New York State Unified Court Sy stem has implemented a sy stemwide initiative in
which, aside from appropriate ex ceptions, parties in civil cases will be referred to mediation, or
some other form of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) as the first step in the case proceeding
Court. The following  Rules shall g overn cases which qualify  for Alternative Dispute Resolution
(“ADR”) throug h presumptive mediation. The Rules set forth herein are intended to apply  in the
Orang e County  Family  Court and shall supplement and be applied in tandem with the Rules of
the Alternative Dispute Resolution Prog ram for the Ninth J udicial District (the Ninth J D Rules”). 
The Orang e County  Family  Court will be referring  appropriate cases to mediation prior
to a first appearance before a J udge. Mediation, a ty pe of ADR,  is a process in which a neutral
facilitates settlement discussions between parties. The neutral has no authority  to make a
decision or impose a settlement upon the parties. The neutral attempts to focus the attention of
the parties on their needs and interests rather than upon rig hts and positions. This helps the
parties to understand each other’s positions and interests, and consider options apart from
conventional litig ation to resolve their dispute, ty pically  leading  to more satisfy ing outcomes,
althoug h any  settlement is entirely  voluntary .
Rule 1. Referral to mediation and qualify ing cases
(A) Ex cept as herein provided, any  contested civil matter shall have a presumption of
referral to mediation or another form of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). F or family  court,
this will consist of custody  and visitation cases, child support cases and certain PI NS cases
[parent/child mediation] . Althoug h the parties may  be referred to mediation, compliance does
not require that the parties reach a settlement. Cases shall be screened by  the Court to determine
whether the case is appropriate for mediation and whether a need for emerg ency relief makes the
referral inappropriate until the emerg ency relief is heard by  the Court. 
(B) Family  offense and custody  and visitation cases that alleg e domestic violence will not
be referred to mediation/ADR.  I ntake and screening  procedures will be implemented by  the
Court to identify  cases in which there are alleg ations of domestic violence and to provide a
process by  which a party  alleg ing violence will make a determination based on informed consent
whether or not to proceed with mediation. Such cases can proceed to mediation if both parties
consent.
(C) All cases subject to the presumption of Alternative Dispute Resolution shall be
referred to the Dispute Resolution Center unless the parties ag ree and consent to an alternate
ADR provider. I f the parties have participated in mediation or other ADR services prior to the
filing  of a petition, they  will not be required to submit to mediation a second time. The Dispute
Resolution Center maintains a roster of OCA-trained mediators, with specific knowledg e in all
areas of family  law. The DRC is responsible for the training , assig nment and oversig ht of the
mediators once a matter is referred to the DRC.
(D) I f it is apparent that a case which was not otherwise elig ible for mediation at the time
of filing  becomes a candidate for mediation as the case prog resses, the J udge may  refer the case
for mediation. However, such referral will not remove the case from the assig ned J udge,
interfere with discovery , nor serve to postpone scheduled motions and hearing s. In the Courts
discretion, the standards and g oals time frame may  be tolled pending  mediation.
(E) All cases involving  child support (ex cept violations and other matters involving
incarceration) will be referred to a mediator who is familiar with the CSMA and the financial
guidelines. Participants will be ex pected to bring  with them all necessary  financial documents
including  tax returns, pay  stubs, educational and medical bills, etc.
Rule 2. Timing  of ADR Process
(A) Unless otherwise ordered by  the Court, the first mediation screening  shall be held
within 10 calendar day s after the referral to mediation, which g enerally  will be g enerated upon
the filing  of the first petition. The filing  of subsequent, related petitions will not ex tend the time. 
(B) Within 2 business day s of the mediation session, the DRC shall provide the Court
with a status update indicating  whether mediation was successful, was unsuccessful or additional
sessions will be held. 
Rule 3. Ex emption/Ex clusion of Cases from Mediation
(A) any  party  to a dispute referred to mediation may  petition the Court to ex clude the
case from mediation if (I ) the issue to be considered has been previously  mediated; (ii) the issue
presents a question of law only ; (iii) other g ood cause is shown before the J udge to whom the
case is assig ned; or (iv) the parties have eng aged the services of a private ADR provider.
(B) For Family  Court matters, the following  actions shall not be referred to mediation
except upon consent of all parties or upon sua sponte motion of the Court:
(1) Objections from ruling s of the Support Mag istrate ;
(2) Abuse and/or Neg lect petitions;
(3) Paternity  proceeding s;
(4) Habeas corpus and writs;
(5) Family  Offense Petitions;
(6) Juvenile Delinquency  petitions. 
Rule 4. Confidentiality  and I mmunity
Any statement made during  court-referred mediation or as a part of intake by  DRC staff
in preparation for a mediation is confidential, not subject to disclosure, may  not be disclosed by
the mediator or staff, and may  not be used as evidence in any  subsequent administrative or
judicial proceeding . Any  document or other document g enerated in connection with mediation os
not subject to discovery .  However, a written and ex ecuted ag reement resulting  from mediation
is not subject to the confidentiality  described above.
Neither a neutral or any  other observer present with permission of the parties during  a
mediation session may  be subpoenaed or otherwise required to testify  concerning  a mediation in
any subsequent court proceeding s, nor are any  noted taken by  the neutral subject to discovery . 
Rule 5. Appearance at Mediation
The mediation sessions will take place at the offices of the Dispute Resolution Services,
or at an appropriate facility  located within the F amily Court building  if deemed necessary . The
presence of parties at all mediation sessions is required in order to move forward with mediation
and it is not necessary  for the parties to appear with attorney s. If one party  appears with an
attorney  and one remains unrepresented and does not consent to the attorney  being  present for
mediation, that attorney  will remain outside the mediation room. I f an ag reement is reached, the
party  can review the ag reement with counsel prior to sig ning it.  If a party  fails to appear at a
duly noticed mediation session without g ood cause, the DRC shall notify  the J udge to whom the
case is assig ned. After the initial Court appearance, the J udge may  refer the matter back to
mediation prior to trial.
Rule 6. Communication
(A) The only  ex parte communication between a party  and the mediator outside of the
mediation session shall be for the purposes of caucus, where the mediator may  ask to meet
privately  with each party  in an attempt to facilitate an ag reement.
(B) In order to preserve the objectivity  of the court and the neutrality  of the mediator,
there will be no communication between the mediator and the Court. The DRC staff will
communicate with the Court reg arding  attendance, request for additional time to complete
mediation, notification that the matter is not appropriate for mediation, or other reasons on
consent of the parties. The parties will be copied on all written communication between the DRC
staff and the Court. 
Rule 7. Completion of Mediation
(A) Mediation shall be completed within 45 day s of the Order referring  the matter to
mediation unless ex tended by  the Court. Any  request for ex tension of mediation shall be on
motion to the Court, unless requested by  the DRC, which such request shall be in writing .
(B) The duration of the mediation session will g enerally  be one to two hours. The session
may be shorter or long er depending  on the assessment of prog ress by  the mediator and parties. I f
additional sessions are needed, the mediator and the parties will schedule the nex t session,
without additional notice being  sent by  the Court.
(C) I f an ag reement is reached, it shall be reduced to writing  at the end of the mediation
session. The mediator is responsible for drafting  the settlement and shall be sig ned by  the
mediator and the parties. The mediator will send a copy  of the ag reement to the Court and the
parties will have the option of withdrawing  their pending  petition(s) or appearing  in Court to
place the ag reement on the record and having  it reduced to a Court Order. [ If both parties are
represented by  counsel, a written proposed Order can be submitted, on consent, prior to the
scheduled Court appearance] .
(D) I f a partial ag reement is reached, it shall be reduced to writing  and sig ned by  the
parties and the mediator and forwarded to the Court. 
(E) If it is apparent that an ag reement cannot be reached, the DRC will report the lack of
agreement to the Court and the matter will proceed in Court. 
Rule 8. Administration of Prog ram
The Prog ram shall be supervised and coordinated by  the Court Attorney  for the individual
Family  Court J udge assig ned to the case, who shall act as the Administrator for the
implementation of ADR for that case. F or cases appearing  before a Support Mag istrate, the
Prog ram will be supervised and coordinated throug h the F amily  Court Clerk’s Office. 
 