Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 1 of  9 
 
    
 
WESTCHESTER COUNTY SURROGATE’S COURT RULES  
 
 
I. OVERVIEW  
 
Proceedings in Westchester County, Surrogate’s Court, are eligible for mediation, and may, at the 
Surrogate’s discretion, be referred to mediation (the “Program”).  The following Rules shall govern 
cases referred to this Program. Cases involving the Public  Administrator shall be exempted from 
referral to this Program.  This Program does not preclude the Court from directing or referring 
parties to other forms of dispute resolution, including settlement conferences with court staff.   
 
 
II. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE  
  
The Surrogate’s Court of Westchester County is dedicated to fulfilling its statutory and 
constitutional mandate to ensure the just and efficient resolution of all matters that come before it. 
The Program has been developed to achieve these ends through ear ly referral to mediation. 
Mediation is often faster, more convenient, less expensive, and less acrimonious, and often results 
in a more mutually acceptable and durable resolution than the normal course of litigation.   
  
 
III. DEFINITIONS  
 
A. Mediation.  A confidential dispute resolution process in which a neutral third party – the 
mediator – helps parties identify issues, clarify perceptions, and explore options for a 
mutually acceptable outcome.  In this process, parties have an opportunity to communicate 
with each other, focus on what is important to them, and to come up with individually 
tailored solutions. During mediation, each party relates his or her understanding of the 
dispute. The Mediator may ask the parties clarifying q uestions. The mediator will not give 
legal advice or force solutions on the parties.  
a. Mediation often involves non -legal as well as legal issues.  Parties are strongly 
encouraged to participate in mediation with their own attorneys.  Parties may also 
choose  to attend sessions without counsel if all participants agree.  Although the 
mediation process can, and often does, result in an agreement, whether to reach an 
agreement, and on what terms, is up to the parties themselves.  

Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 2 of  9 
 
 B. Mediator. A trained third party neutral. The Mediator is not a decision -maker. The 
Mediator serves as a neutral facilitator of communication and helps the parties reach 
resolution of the issue(s) being mediated.  In this document, Mediator may also refer to a 
co-mediation team where two such neutrals are working together to mediate a case. For the 
purposes of these rules, a Mediator is a neutral who has fulfilled the requirements of Part 
146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge and is mediating a given case  pursuant 
to these program rules. This is distinct from private mediators who mediate cases outside 
these program rules.   
C. ADR Program Contact.  A person or entity designated by the court to facilitate the 
assignment of court proceedings to mediation in acc ordance with the ADR Program Rules. 
(see §VIII below) .  
 
 
IV. PROCEDURES  
 
A. Timing of Referral to Mediation  
1. The Court shall refer parties to mediation as early as practicable.  
2. The need for discovery shall not prevent parties from attending an initial mediation 
session unless the Court determines otherwise.   
3. All parties and counsel shall be prepared to be referred to a scheduled mediation session 
upon completion of jurisdiction.   
4. Counsel shall prepare for their case to be referred to mediation by:  
a. Informing their clients about the Court’s mediation program and its expectations 
and requirements:  
b. Identifying the information and material that may be useful to exchange with other 
parties in advance of mediation.  
B. Order of Reference:  
1. Court staff shall refer matters to mediation by an Order of Reference informing 
parties and their counsel that the case shall undergo mediation.  
2. The Order of Reference shall specify:  
a. That it is up to the parties to schedule and participate in mediation w ithin 45 
days of receipt of the Order of Reference.  
b. A date thereafter upon which to return to Court.   
3. Upon receipt of the Order of Reference, parties and counsel shall contact the ADR 
Program Contact listed therein within three (3) days to:  
a. Confirm the in itial mediation session, which shall take place at the courthouse, 
unless the parties agree otherwise, or  
b. Inform the ADR Program Contact of their choice to mediate with an outside 
mediation provider to be paid by the parties. If the parties wish to choose their 
own mediation provider, they shall inform the ADR Program Contact of (a) the 
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 3 of  9 
 
 name and contact information of the mediator selected; and (b) date of the first 
session.  
C. The Mediation Process  
1. Pre-mediation Memoranda:  If requested by the Mediator, the parties shall provide a 
confidential memorandum, limited to three pages, setting forth their view as to the 
facts, the issues that are in dispute, suggestions as to how the matter might be resolved, 
as well as such other information concerning the litigation as the mediator deems 
necessary for the effective negotiation and resolution of the issues. No portion of the 
confidential memorandum shall be disclosed to the Court, nor, unless otherwise agreed 
by the parties, to any  other party to the proceeding.  
2. Pre-mediation Conference Calls:  The Mediator may request a conference call 
regarding any preliminary matters and may thereafter meet privately with any party and 
their respective counsel prior to or during a mediation sessio n.  
3. Location of Mediation Sessions:  The initial mediation session shall take place in the 
courthouse, unless otherwise agreed by the Mediator and the parties.  The location of 
any subsequent mediation sessions shall be held at the courthouse, unless otherw ise 
agreed to by the parties and the Mediator.  
4. Informed Consent:  At the beginning of the initial session, the mediator shall:  
a. Explain to all parties that all communications are confidential with narrow 
exceptions summarized in Section VI;  
b. Explain that an y party may, during the initial session or at any -time thereafter, 
end the mediation process and return to Court;  
c. Request that all parties and attorneys acknowledge in writing that they were 
informed of and understand the voluntary and confidential nature of the 
mediation process.  
5. Caucus:  At any point in the process either party, their counsel, or the Mediator may 
suggest meeting separately with the mediator in caucus. During the caucus, the 
Mediator may explore how that party views the dispute and the imp act of any proposed 
solutions. The Mediator keeps confidential the information discussed in caucus unless 
the party permits disclosure.  
6. Time to Complete Mediation:  Unless otherwise permitted by the Court, the parties 
shall complete the mediation process wi thin forty -five (45) days of receiving the Order 
of Reference. If additional time is necessary, parties must submit a stipulation to the 
Court to be so ordered.  
7. Conclusion of Mediation:  The mediation concludes upon all parties signing a written 
agreement resolving all or some of the matters in dispute, or whenever any party or the 
Mediator decides that the process has ended and notifies the others orally or in writing. 
Upon the conclusion of the mediation, the Mediator shall email within twenty -four (24) 
hours all parties, attorneys and the ADR Program Contact that the mediation process 
has ended.  
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 4 of  9 
 
 8. Agreements:  Agreements resolving some or all of the legal matters in dispute shall be 
signed by all parties and submitted to the court.  
9. Mediation Report to the C ourt:  Within five (5) business days after the conclusion of 
the mediation sessions, the ADR Program Contact shall send a Report (“Mediation 
Report”) to the Court, copying counsel, that states:  
a. The date of the initial session and whether each party and coun sel appeared at 
the initial session;  
b. The dates of any subsequent sessions that were held, but not whether parties 
appeared; and  
c. Whether the parties reached partial, complete, or no agreement on the issues.  
10. Mediation Survey:  Parties and counsel shall complete a Mediation Participant Survey 
and return it promptly to the ADR Program Contact after the final mediation session. 
The survey is meant to track participant satisfaction and shall not include any details of 
the substance  of the case or mediation.  
D. Fees and Mediator Compensation  
1. The Court itself does not charge or administer fees.   
2. Initial Session:  Court Roster Mediators shall not be compensated for the first sixty  
(60) minutes of the initial mediation session under the P rogram. Mediators shall not be 
compensated under the Program for preparation time or administrative tasks. Unless 
otherwise provided in these rules or agreed upon by the parties in writing, no fee, 
retainer or other payment may be charged or paid prior to the conclusion of the first 
sixty  (60) minutes of the initial mediation session.  
3. Substitute Mediators : In the event that the appointed mediator has a conflict of interest 
or is otherwise unable to serve, a substitute mediator shall be appointed who is bou nd 
by all of the provisions of the court order, including providing the first sixty (60)  
minutes of the initial mediation session without compensation.  
4. Party -selected Mediators:  If the parties wish to select their own mediator, whether or 
not they are on the Court's Roster, that mediator may negotiate a fee with the parties 
and need not provide the first sixty  (60) minutes of the initial mediation session without 
compensation.  
5. Payment Disclosure:  At the beginning of the initial in -person mediation session, the 
appointed Mediator shall disclose to the parties in writing the specific time at which 
the non -compensable sixty (60) minute of the initial mediation session will conclude.  
That written disclosure shall advise the parties that any mediation continued beyond 
that time will be billed by the mediator at a rate of up to $450.00 per hour.  Additionally, 
the written disclosure shall be signed by all parties participating in the me diation and 
state how the mediator fees shall be allocated among them. At the expiration of the first 
sixty  minutes of the initial session as previously defined, any party may elect not to 
continue with the mediation, which decision must be immediately com municated orally 
or in writing to the Mediator and all parties. In such situation, despite the fact that one 
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 5 of  9 
 
 or more parties have opted out of mediation, mediation can continue as to those parties 
desiring to continue, to the extent that the mediation can be meaningful without 
participation by the party or parties that opted out. Only those parties who continue 
with the mediation beyond the first non -compensable sixty  (60) minutes shall be 
responsible for payment of the Mediator's fee and expenses, as set f orth below in 
subparagraph vii.  
6. Newly -Added Parties:  The first sixty  (60) minutes in any case referred to this program 
is not extended by reason of the addition of a new party to the case. If a new party 
enters the case after the expiration of the first sixty  (60) minutes of the initial mediation 
session, that party may agree  to participate in the mediation subject to the same terms 
as the rest of the parties on a fee -sharing basis.  
7. Allocation of Mediation Fees and Expenses:  The parties in interest who participate 
in mediation beyond the first sixty  (60) minutes of the initia l mediation session shall 
share the costs and fees of the mediator (a) equally, or (b) as agreed in writing.  All fees 
must be spelled out in writing.  Appointed mediators shall waive the share of the fee 
allocable to any party who has been granted permiss ion to proceed in their case as a 
poor person pursuant to New York Civil Practice Law and Rules (CPLR) § 1101.  
8. Co-Mediation : The presence of more than one appointed mediator shall not increase 
the cost of mediation to the parties. When a case is co -mediat ed by two appointed Court 
Roster Mediators, the Mediators shall split the set hourly rate.  
  
V. PARTICIPATING IN MEDIATION  
.  
A. Party Participation:  Parties are required to attend all mediation sessions. The Mediator 
has the discretion to allow remote participation in mediation.  
B. Attorney participation :  Parties are strongly encouraged to participate in mediation with 
counsel.  
C. Non-Party and Defaulted Party Participation:  If a non -party or a party who has 
defaulted before the Surrogate’s Court is invited to participate in the mediation, which 
participation must be agreed to by the parties and the mediator, the mediator shall obtain 
the participating non -party's or defaulted party’s written consent as to confidentiality and 
any other matters requested by the parties, as facilitated by the mediator. A party who has 
defaulted before the Surrogate’s Court is not relieved of such default by such party’s 
participation in the mediation.  
D. Screening :  Cases shall be screened for appropriateness for mediation by the ADR Program 
Contact and the Mediator.                                                                                                                                             
E. Opting -Out:  A case otherwise subject to mediation may be exempted from such mediation 
upon a showing of good cause. A party seeking an exemption shall apply for leave of court 
to be exempted. Failure to seek an exemption in this manner shall constitute a waiver of 
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 6 of  9 
 
 any objection to the mediation referral. If the court grants leave to “opt out” from referral 
to mediation, then the case shall not proceed to mediation at that time.   
F. Compliance : Failure to comply with these rules may subject the offending party or 
attorney to sanctions, including but not limited to sanctions under CPLR 3126 and 22 
NYCRR 130.  
 
VI. CONFIDENTIALITY  
  
A. Mediation with a court roster mediator shall be confidential and, except as otherwise 
provided, any document prepared, or communications made, by parties, their counsel or a 
mediator for, during, or in connection with the proceeding shall not be disclosed outside 
its confines by any participant. No party to the proceeding shall, during the action referred 
to mediation or in any other legal matter, seek to compel production of documents, notes, 
or other writings prepared for or generated in connection with m ediation, or the testimony 
of any other party or the mediator concerning communications made during the proceeding. 
A settlement, in whole or in part, reached during mediation shall be set forth in a writing 
signed by all parties affected or their duly aut horized agents. Documents and information 
otherwise discoverable under the CPLR or the New York Surrogate's Court Procedure Act 
shall not be shielded from disclosure merely because they are submitted or referred to in 
mediation.  
B. Notwithstanding these conf identiality provisions, communications and information may be 
subject to disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding in any 
of the following six circumstances:  
1. Attendance : Whether the parties and their counsel attended the ini tial session will be 
reported to the court.  
2. Session Information : The Mediator may report to the Court whether the parties are 
requesting additional mediation sessions as well as the date of any mediation session.  
3. Waiver : Parties to the mediation and the M ediator may agree to waive confidentiality. 
The waiver must specify the individual communication(s) or information that will be 
disclosed, the person or entity to whom the disclosure will be made, and the purpose of 
the disclosure. All waivers shall be in writing.  
4. Written Agreement : A writing signed by all the parties embodying a negotiated 
agreement submitted to the Court for review. Only those signed agreements that have 
become court orders or decrees may be admissible in any present or future judicial or  
administrative proceeding.  
5. Threats of Imminent, Serious Harm : If a communication or information constitutes 
a credible threat of serious and imminent harm, either to the speaker or another person 
or entity, the appropriate authorities and/or the potential  victim may be notified.  
6. Allegations of Child Abuse or Neglect : If a communication or information relates to 
an allegation of child abuse or neglect as defined in Family Court Act § 1012(e) and (f) 
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 7 of  9 
 
 and Social Services Law § 412, and for which disclosure is  required pursuant to Social 
Services Law § 413, appropriate authorities may be notified.  
 
VII. MEDIATORS  
A. Qualifications  
1. Subject to the approval of the Administrative Judge, the Surrogate shall establish, and 
the ADR Program Contact shall maintain, a roster of trained mediators (“The Roster”) 
for the Program which shall be available on the Surrogate Court, Westchester County 
website. To be eligible to join the Roster as a Mediator, a person shall satisfy the 
training and experience requirements of Part  146 of the Rules of the Chief 
Administrative Judge as follows:  
a. All Court Roster Mediators shall have received at least:  
i. 24 hours of basic mediation training ; and  
ii. 16 hours of additional training in the specific mediation techniques 
applicable to Surrogate Court matters.  
b. All Court Roster Mediators shall have experience mediating the types of cases 
that come before Surrogate’s Court. Mediation experience can be achie ved by:  
i. Mediating at least three (3) Surrogate’s Court cases in a New York State 
Court, or  
ii. Completing a Surrogate’s Court Mediation Apprenticeship.  
c. A Surrogate’s Court Mediation Apprenticeship shall include:  
i. Observing at least one (1) mediation, regardles s of case type;  
ii. Co-mediating three (3) Surrogate’s Court cases;  
iii. Debriefing all observations and mediations with a court roster mediator 
or ADR Program Contact;  and 
iv. Evaluation by a court roster mediator or ADR Program Contact . 
2. All Court Roster Mediators mus t receive six hours of approved Continuing Education 
relevant to mediation and/or Surrogate’s Court matters every two years.  
3. Fulfillment of these requirements does not guarantee acceptance onto the Roster. Final 
placement on the Roster is in the discretio n of the District Administrative Judge under 
Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator.   
B. Selection:   
1. The Court or its designee shall appoint a mediator or co -mediators from the Roster that 
meet the requirements of Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge.  
2. Co-mediation may occur as part of an apprentice program when one mediator is 
mentorin g another. Co -mediation may also occur when two Court Roster Mediators are 
appointed to the case.  
3. The Roster shall include mediators or mediation service providers who can provide free 
and reduced -fee mediation services to qualified participants.   
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 8 of  9 
 
 4. If par ties reject an appointed Mediator, they must notify the ADR Program Contact 
within three days. If the basis for the rejection is a conflict of interest between the 
mediator and one of the parties or their attorneys, the parties may request a different 
medi ator from the Roster. Rejection will not extend the time permitted for the 
completion of mediation.  
5. Upon receipt of the Order of Reference, and in compliance with Paragraph 
IV(b)(iii)(2), parties may opt out of the court’s mediator appointment process and  hire 
at their own expense:  
a. a private mediator who is not on the Roster.  
b. a mediator who is on the Roster. Mediators who are members of the Roster but are 
selected independently of the court’s selection process are not obligated to provide 
the first sixty  (60) minutes of the initial mediation session without compensation or 
the rate of Mediator compensation identified in Paragraph IV(d)(v).  
  
C. Immunity  
  
1. The Mediator shall be immune from suit as a result of any conduct or omission during 
performance of duties in that capacity to the extent permissible by law.  
2. Should a party attempt in any legal action to compel the testimony of the mediator 
concerning the  substance of a mediation, that party shall hold the mediator harmless 
against any resulting expenses, including reasonable legal fees incurred by the mediator 
or the reasonable value of time spent by the mediator in representing himself or herself 
in conn ection therewith.  
  
D. Avoiding Conflicts of Interest  
  
1. Before accepting an appointment as a Mediator, a Mediator shall make an inquiry that 
is reasonable under the circumstances to determine whether there are any known facts 
that a reasonable individual would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the 
Mediator, including a financial or personal interest in the outcome, and an existing or 
past relationship with a party or their attorneys or foreseeable participant in the 
mediation. If the  Mediator wishes to accept an appointment after discovering a 
potentially disqualifying fact, the Mediator shall disclose the disqualifying fact to the 
parties and shall not serve unless the parties consent thereto in writing. If, after 
accepting a case, a  Mediator learns of any disqualifying fact, the Mediator shall disclose 
it to the parties as soon as practicable. If such conflict is not waived by the parties, or 
if, such conflict might reasonably be viewed as undermining the integrity of the 
mediation, the Mediator shall withdraw and notify the parties and the Court.  
 
 
Effective January 1, 2023  
 
 
Page 9 of  9 
 
 E. Quality Assurance  
  
1. The ADR Program Contact shall develop and promulgate consistent practices for 
ensuring mediator quality and fitness. Such practices may include, but are not limited 
to: 
a. Observing mediators periodically;  
b. Providing and/or requiring continuing education relevant to mediating 
Surrogate Court cases;  
c. Debriefing cases with mediators.  
2. Any Roster mediator or prospective mediator may be observed at any time by the ADR 
Program Contact, or staff of the NYS Unified Court System’s Statewide ADR Office, 
before appointment on the Roster or to remain on the Roster.  
 
VIII.  ADR PROGRAM CONTACT  
  
A. The court shall designate an ADR Program Contact.  
B. The ADR Program Contact shall oversee the administrative requirements of the ADR 
Program, which includes but is not limited to:  
1. Monitoring all proceedings referred to mediation;  
2. Scheduling the first sessions for proceedings that opt for Mediators on the Roster;  
3. Providing information to  the court on the status of cases referred to mediation;  
4. Maintaining statistical data on the ADR Program.  
 
 
 
Honorable Brandon R. Sall  
Surrogate, Westchester County  
 
 