Queens County Suprem e Court
 Matrim onial  Mediation P rogram
Mediator Application1
The Queens County  Matrimonial Mediati on Program offers mediation in cases referred by
Justices of the Supreme Court. Those who wish to become mediators must (I) have successful ly
completed a minimum of 40 hours  of mediation training  in an OCA-sponsored or OCA-
recog nized training  prog ram and (ii) meet the specific requirements of the L ocal Prog ram Rules.
Please review Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge on Guidelines for
Qualifications and Training  of ADR Neutrals Serving  on Court Rosters, located at
http://www.ny courts.g ov/rules/chiefadmin/146.shtml
Mediators who join the Roster must be willing  to conduct the first 90 minutes of mediation on a
pro bono basis.  Thereafter, the parties may make private arrang ements with the mediator subject
to Prog ram Rules.   
Each applicant is requested to provide the information called for below and a resume.  
*The Matrimo nial Mediator Affirmation of Compliance must accompany  this application
(available on the Queens Supreme Court, Civil Term, Alternative Dispute Resolution webpag e.) 
1. BASIC INFORMATION: Please your full name, firm or organization name, address , phone
and fax  number and email address.
2. ADMISSIONS:  Please list the year of your admission to the New State York Bar, and the
names of any other jurisdictions or courts where you are admitted to practice and the year of
admission.
3. EDUCATION: Please list all undergraduate, graduate, and legal or other degrees, educational
institutions from which deg rees were earned, and the y ear y ou obtained the deg ree(s).
1 Updat ed May  2017
4. MEDIATION EXP ERIENCE: Please list all training  programs in mediation that you have
completed, including  a description of the program (e.g., basic mediation training , matrimonial
mediation training ), the number of hours of each course, and the entity  that presented the
program. 
Please state whet her you have been certified as a mediator and provide details. If you are
curren tly serving  as a mediator on a roster, please identify  the court or organization where you
serve. Please provide a reasonable estimate of the number of mediat ions for which you have
served as mediator and the number of mediations involving  custody .
5. CONTINUING  LEG AL EDUCATION:  Please list all New York State CLE programs that
you have attended (with dates), on the subjects of Equitable Distribution, Maintenance, Child
Support, Custody  and Parenting  Time
Thank y ou very  much for taking  the time to complete this form and for y our interest in our ADR
Prog ram.
Please complete and send this form to Prog ram Coor dinator Maria Bradley , Esq., at
mbradley @ny courts.g ov, or by fax at 718-29 8-1099, or by mail, 88-11 Sutphin Boulevard, 5th
FL, Jamaica, New York 11435.