1  SUPREME  COURT  OF THE  STATE  OF NEW  YORK  
COUNTY  OF WESTCHESTER  
  x 
 
 
 
Plaintiff(s),  PRESUMPTIVE ADR  
STIPULATION AND  
ORDER  OF REFERENCE  
-against - 
Index  No.:  ________   
 
Date  RJI Filed:  
  
Defendant(s).  
  x 
It is hereby  stipulated  by and between  all parties  to the within  action  as follows:  
 
1. This action qualifies for Presumptive Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) pursuant to the  
Westchester  County  Supreme  Court  Presumptive  Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  Program  Rules  
and the parties request  referral to Presumptive  ADR;  
 
2. The parties  have  selected  the following  Presumptive  ADR  program:  
 
    Mediation  by a mediator  from the  Roster  
 
The parties  have  selected :    
with an address  at:     
and phone  number :      
 
[ ] plaintiff  [ ] defendant  has requested  waiver  of fees due to indigent  status  
 
   Private  Mediation/Arbitration  
 
3. The parties  agree  to be bound  by the Civil Case Management Parts Rules and 9th 
Judicial District ADR Rules . 
 
4. The first mediation  session  shall  take place  within  thirty  (30) days hereof.  
2  [To be  filled in  by Court]  
 
Compliance  Conference:  Parties/counsel  for all parties  shall  appear  at a compliance  conference  
to report  on the  status  of ADR  in the Compliance  Part on . 
The parties  are reminded  that Standard  & Goals  expires  on and 
shall  not be  extended due  to the  pendency  of presumptive  ADR.  5. The following  discovery/documentation  (to the extent  available  and applicable  to the specific  
case type) shall be exchanged by the parties within three (3) weeks thereof with a copy of the 
same  to the  mediator:  
 
 Insurance  information,  including  insurance  company  and policy  limits  
 Lien information  
 Bill(s)  of Particulars  
 Medical  reports  
 Appraisals  
 Contract(s)/billing  statement(s)/payment  history  
 Pleadings  and any prior  court  orders  in matters  not subject  to NYSCEF  
 Other    
 
6. In matters referred to mediators from the Roster, the parties agree to remit payment, in the  
sum of $400.00 per hour, to be shared in equal parts by participating parties, for mediation  
sessions  requested  beyond  the initial  ninety  (90) minute  free mediation  session,  unless  otherwise  
agreed in writing by the parties. Parties desiring to continue mediation beyond the initial session  
shall enter into a written agreement for payment of such fees with the mediat or prior to the  
second session. Parties who are exempt from such fees due to indigent status shall not be  
responsible for any portion of the mediator’s fee. Subject to approval, mediators shall earn  
CLE/pro bono credit for time in mediation sessions involv ing indigent parties which would  
otherwise  be compensable.  
 
7. In matters  referred  to mediators  from  the Roster,  within  three ( 3) days hereof,  Plaintiff  shall  
serve  the  selected  mediator  with a copy  of this Order  and file  proof  of such service  on 
NYSCEF.  
 
8. Any mediator  selected  by the parties  who declines  the reference  must  notify  the parties  and the 
Court of same within five (5) days of receipt of this Order. To avoid an appearance, the parties  
may select an alternate mediator and submit a proposed Amended Stipulation via NYSCEF with  
the name of the alternate mediator to the Court to be so -ordered. In the event that the parties  
cannot  agree  on an alternate  mediator,  Plaintiff  shall  request  an immediate  conference.  
The contents  and provisions  of the foregoing  proposed  stipulation  are agreed  to, and the parties  
request  that the  Court order same.  
 
3   
 
 
Dated:    
 
Attorneys  for Plaintiff:  Attorneys  for Defendant:  
(Print  Name)    
(Signature)    (Print  Name)    
(Signature)      
Mailing  Address:  Mailing  Address:  
 
 
 
Phone/Facsimile  Number:  Phone/Facsimile  Number:  
 
E-mail Address:  E-mail Address:  
 
 
****  
Attorneys  for/or  pro se party:  Attorneys  for/or  pro se party:  
(Print  Name)    
(Signature)    (Print  Name)    
(Signature)      
Mailing  Address:  Mailing  Address:  
 
 
 
Phone/Facsimile  Number:  Phone/Facsimile  Number:  
 
E-mail Address:  E-mail Address:  
 
 
 
 
SO ORDERED:  
 
 
                                                       , J.S.C.   
First conference  scheduled  before  Court  Attorney -Referee   , 
Room / Teams  on . 
 
Indigent  status  has been  granted  to . 