SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH 
QUEENS COUNTY 
MATR IMONIAL ME DIATION PRO GRAM 
                                                                    
Frequently Ask ed Questions
Quee ns County  Supreme Court’s Matr imonial Mediation  Progr am offe rs a f ree, 90-minute initial
session with a mediator to divorc ing pa rties who alr eady have c ases pe nding in Que ens County
Supreme Court.  Prog ram media tors have sig nificant tra ining a nd experience  in family  mediation
and in opening  paths of communica tion that emphasize common gr ound and enc ourag e
cooper ation.  They  help par ties to resolve ke y issues that aff ect their  relationships wit h their
children a nd the financ ial well-be ing of  all family  members. Par ties are  free to choose  at the end
of the fr ee 90- minute session whether the y wish to continue in mediation. 
What is Mediation?  
Mediation is a conf idential, informal dispute re solution process in which a ne utral third per son –
the mediator – he lps divorcing  parties to communica te and r each individually -tailored solutions
to pare nting a nd economic disputes.  Me diation allows the parties to e xpand the discussion
beyond disputed leg al issues and to addr ess the fe eling s, needs, a nd values unde rlying the
conflict. Media tion often results in a wr itten ag reement that can be  incorpora ted into an Orde r or
Judgement of D ivorce .  
Mediators do not dec ide who wa s right or wrong  in the past or impose solutions.  They  do not
evalua te the streng ths and wea knesses of e ither par ty’s case, asse ss the likely  court outcome , or
offer legal advice .  Instead, media tors help par ties focus on their r estructur ed future  and empowe r
the par ties to make their own de cisions that meet their unique ne eds and inter ests.  Please note
that mediation is not appropriate  wher e ther e is domestic violence  or any  sever e powe r imbalanc e
that impacts an individual’s ability  to express what is in his or her own be st interest. 
The pre sence  of sepa rate counsel for  each party  during  mediation sessions is ex pecte d and
strong ly encour aged.  Whether a ppear ing in the me diation along side their clients or a dvising
clients outside of the media tion process, a ttorney s play  a crucial role  in informing pa rties of their
legal rig hts and responsibilities and the conse quence s of proposed solutions.  
What are t he Benefits of  Mediation? 
Resear ch shows that mediation settles a la rge per centa ge of c ases other wise hea ded for  litigation,
speeds se ttlement, saves money , and incr eases compliance , and satisfa ction, with ag reements. 
Most importantly , mediation leads to improved r elationships betwee n pare nts and their childre n,
as we ll as betwee n divorce d pare nts, even y ears after  the settlement.   Finally , mediation leave s1
parties no wor se off : parties ar e still free  to go to tria l if they  cannot se ttle.
What Happ ens in Mediation? 
Both parties have the opportunity  to raise issues of concern and t o explain the facts of the dis pute
as each person sees them.  The mediator then asks questio ns to identify those parenting and
economic issues that require discussi on.  Once  the m ediator and parties have identified the issues
for discussion, the mediator helps the parties work collabora tively  to explore and choose options that
meet the pa rties’ ne eds. 
Although most information i s exchang ed with every one at the table, there may  come a time when
either party , the party ’s counsel or the mediator suggests a caucus.   During  the caucus, the mediator
meets individually  with each party  to explore how the parties view the dispute and the impact of any
proposed solutions.  The mediator doe s not sha re any information discussed in caucus without the
disclosing pa rty’s per mission.
If the parties agree to a parenting plan that resolves the issues of child custody ,  visitation or financ ial
issues, that agreement will be returne d to the referring Justice for revie w.  If approve d, the agreement
may be incorpora ted in the court’s Orde r or Judgment of Divorce .  If the parties are unable to reach
agreement on some or all of the  issues, they  return to c ourt. 
Who are the M ediators?
The media tors on the Court’s Roster of Ne utrals have  succe ssfully  completed a minimum  of six ty
(60) hours of family  mediation training , have at least 4 years of family mediation experience ,
including 250 hours of face-to-f ace mediation with clients, and have mediated a minimum  of 25
cases involving issues of c ustody  and visitation.
Do I P ay for Mediation?
Quee ns County  Supreme Court’s Matr imonial Mediation Progr am offe rs a f ree, 90-minute initial
session with a mediator. I f the pa rties sche dule additional sessions, the mediator is entitled to a
fee. The fe e is  neg otiated betwe en the pa rties and media tor, but shall be no more tha n $250 per
hour.   
How is a Mediation Schedu led?
Ask to be re ferred to the Ma trimonial Mediation Progr am at any  time that y ou appea r in court. 
Once  the cour t sends the par ties to mediation, the Progr am will provide the pa rties and their
counsel the c ontact informa tion for the mediator . For  more infor mation, please c ontact the
Prog ram Coordinator a t mbradley @ny courts.g ov  or ca ll 718-298-1100.
Robert Emery , et. al, Divorc e Media tion: R esearch a nd Reflec tions, Family  Court1
Review, Vol. 43 No. 1 ( Januar y 2005) pp. 22-37.
Queens County Ma trimonial Mediatio n Progra m  - Fact Sheet
The following  provides basic  information and is not meant to substitute for the full Statement of
Procedur es. 
• You must have a  divorce  case  pending  in Queens Supre me Court. 
• The Prog ram provide s a mediation ser vices for  pare nting a nd economic issues in
contested ma trimonial or post-judgme nt case s.. 
• Cases ca n be re ferred e ither by  the Court or on re quest of the pa rties.     
• There  is only  one attenda nce r equire ment:  Parties must participate in an initial 90-minute
mediation session.  There  is no fee to the me diator for  this first session.
• If parties choose to continue w ith mediation after the  first 90-minute session, the mediator
shall be entitled to compensa tion.   I n no case  shall the fee  exceed $250 pe r hour.  The  Prog ram
itself imposes no fee .
• The media tor is ge nerally selec ted by  the Prog ram off ice.  Par ties, howeve r, are free to
substitut e a me diator of their  choice  within the guide lines set down in the Proce dures
• The pre sence  of counse l for ea ch par ty is ex pecte d and strong ly encour aged.  Howeve r,
by agreement of the pa rties, mediation may  proce ed in the abse nce of  counsel unless other wise
order ed by  the cour t. 
• Experie nce show s that party  participa tion, as opposed to participa tion by  counsel only ,
both increa ses the likelihood of an a greement and enha nces the  parties’  satisfac tion with it . 
There fore, parties will par ticipate unless exempted by  the mediator f or good cause  shown.
• All communications in the mediation proce ss are  confide ntial (with cer tain appropr iate
exceptions defined in the Statement of  Procedur es [e.g ., alleg ations of child abuse  or neg lect]).  I f
mediation results in a written a greement signe d by all parties, it will be submitted to the court for
revie w. 
• Firm de adlines g overn the  Prog ram.  Media tors are  selec ted within five business day s of
referral of a  matter to the Prog ram.  I nitial sessions mus t be conduc ted within 20 day s of
confirma tion of the mediator.  All sessions must be conc luded within 75 day s.   Other de adlines
are noted in the Statement of Proce dures.
•  For additional information, please  call the AD R Coordinator, Maria B radle y, Esq., at
(718) 298- 1100, or send e -mail mbradley @ny courts.g ov.