FAMILY COURT OF  THE STATE OF  NEW YORK
COUNTY OF  WESTCHESTER
RULES OF  THE F AMILY COURT
ALTERNATIVE DISP UTE RESOLUTION-MEDIATION P ROG RAM
PREAMBLE
The following  rules govern the cases in Westchester County  Family  Court which are eligible for
Alternative Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) throug h presumptive mediation. The Rules set forth
herein supplement and shall  be applied in conjunction with the General Mediation Rules for the
Ninth Judicial District (“Ninth JD Rules”). Any terms not specifically  defined herein are as
defined in the Ninth J D Rules.
Rule 1. P rogram
Unless the parties demonstrate to the Cour t good cause for opting  out, cases referred to the
Alternativ e Dispute Resolution/Mediation Prog ram (“Prog ram”) shall be mediated. Cases which
qualify  for referral to the Program shall be those cases that have been desig nated by the
Westchester County  Family  Court as qualifying for presumptive mediation, as identified in Rule
2 herein, as well as any eligible cases where all parties have elected to pursue mediation, and any
eligible cases where the Court has ex ercised its discretion to refer the matter(s) to mediation.
Rule 2. Cases Qualif ying f or Presumptive Mediation and Determ ination of  Suitability
Listed below are those cases which have been desig nated as qualify ing for presumptive
mediation. Unless the parties demonstrate good cause for opting  out, such cases shall be referred
to mediation utiliz ing the procedures and forms established by  the Ninth J udicial District Rules.  
(1) Custody /visitation/g uardianship cases, including  modificati on and/or enforcement of
custody /visitation/g uardianship involving  Indigent Litigants: After issue is joine d, the Court
shall make proper inquiry  and review paperwo rk relating  to the parties’ finances.  If the parties
are indig ent, they will be referred to participate in the PEACE program by Family  Kind and then
will mediate at the local Community  Dispute Resolution Center (CDRC) of CL USTER, I nc. 
(2) Custody /visitation/g uardianship cases, including  modi fication and/or enforcement of
custody /visitation/g uardianship involving  Non- Indigent Litigants: After issue is joined, the
Court shall make proper inquiry  and review paperwork relating  to the parties ’ finances.  If the
parties are found to have financial means they will be referred  to participate in the PEACE
program by Family  Kind and then will be referred to mediation to be conducted by a roster
mediator or F amily  Kind.
(3) After issue is joined, termination of parental rights cases will be referred to permanency
mediation after discovery  is completed to be conducted by a mediator who has been accepted to
the permanency  mediation roster;
1
(4)  Any cases that do not fall into the list of cases above, but where all parties request and
consent to participate in mediation, or where the Court directs the case to go to mediation in the
exercise of the Court’s discretion.
Notwithstanding the above, any case in which there is an active temporary  or permanent
stay away  order of protection involving  the parties or an active child protective services (“CPS”)
investig ation is not elig ible for mediation.
Rule 3. Mediators
Westcheste r County ’s Community  Dispute Resolution Center (“CDRC”) is CLUSTER,
Inc. All eligible custody , visitation or guardianship cases involving  indig ent parties will be
presumptively  referred to the CDRC for mediation.
If the CDR C is not able to take a case, or the parties request and consent to being referred
to an alternate mediator, the Court will refer them to a mediator from the roster of approved
Westchester County  mediators.
Permanency  mediators are those who have had training  pursuant to the Rule of the
Administrative J udge’s Part 146 coupled with enhanced permanency  mediation training .
Unless otherwise directed by the Court , the Mediator shall be compensated in accordance
with the Ninth JD Rules, including  those provisions allowing  for exemptions from the parties
having  to pay for mediator compensation and those provisions allowing  for portions of the
Mediator’s time to be non-compensable.
Rule 4. Subject Matter Rules:
Custody /Visitation/Guardianship Cases:
After issue is joined, unless the parties demonstrate good cause to opt out of presumptive
media tion, or the presiding  Judge makes a determination that a case is inelig ible or the presiding
Judge believes that, based upon the particular facts and circumstances of the case, that mediation
would not be beneficial or appropriate, the matter shall be referred to mediation. At the first
appearance where both parties to the action are present, the Judge will refer the matter to
mediation through either the CDRC, Family Kind or a mediator from the roster, utilizing the
procedures and forms established  by the Ninth JD Rules. Attorney s for the children and parties
may be assig ned prior to or at the first appearance.
If there is a representative from the CDRC in Court at the time that the case involving  indig ent
litigants is heard, the matter will immediately  be refer red to the CDRC and the parties will be
directed to speak to the representative, start the intak e process and schedule the initial mediation
session. If a CDRC representative is not present in court when the matter is heard, a written
referral will be sent to the mediator and the parties. The parties will be directed to contact the
mediator within a specified time period. The matter will then be adjourned for a period of time to
2
allow the mediation process to commence. Generally , the Court will adjourn the matter for a
period of 30-45 days for this to occur. The Judge presiding over the matter may adjust the length
of adjournment, taking  into consideration the particular facts and circumstances of the case and
the dates of the initial mediation session, if known.
The Court shall then direct the Mediator to provide a report to the Court prior to the
return date containing  non-confidential information such as: whethe r the intake process has been
completed, the dates of any future mediation session, and the status of mediation.  The Court will
notify  the Mediator of the nex t court date.
If the parties are engaged in mediation, and the parties and Mediator believ e that it
would be beneficial for the mediation process to continue, the matter may be further adjourned at
the discretion of the Family  Court Judge presiding  over the case. Alternatively , if the Family
Court Judge receives information that the parties did not participate, the mediation process is not
advancing  or that an agreement has not been reached, the Judge may advance the case as his or
her calendar permits, and the case will prog ress according ly.
After completion of the mediation, upon request of a party , or upon its own initiative, the
Family  Court Judge, in his or her discretion, may issue an order directing  a second referral to
mediation. Any such referral shall be entertained and ordered as early as practicable and shall be
administered in accordance with these rules and the Ninth J D Rules.
Permanency  Planning  Mediation: 
After issue is joined, the presiding  judge will refer the parties their counsel, the attorney (s) for
the child(ren), the foster parents, the Assistant County  Attorney  and appropri ate staff from the
Westchester County  Department of Social Services to mediation.
Rule 5. P rotocols:
1.Client Preparation: Counsel shall prepare for their case to be referred to mediation b y:
a. Informing  their clients about the Court' s mediation prog ram and its
expectations and requirements.
b. Identify ing the information and material that may  be useful to ex chang e with
other parties in advance of mediation, including  any information required to
be ex chang ed by  any discovery  protocol prescribed by  the Part.
1.Pre-mediation Memoranda: The parties shall provide a five pag e-limited confidential
memorandum setting  forth their view as to the facts, the issues that are in dispute,
suggestions as to how the matter mig ht be resolved, as well as such other information
concerning  the litig ation as the mediator deems necessary  for the effective neg otiation
and resolution of the issues. No portion of the confidential memorandum shall be
disclosed to the Court, nor, unless otherwise ag reed by  the parties, to any  other party  to
the proceeding . Any  departure from the requirements set forth herein may  be
authoriz ed by  the Part or the Mediator.
3
a. Pre-mediation Conference Calls: The Mediator may  request a conference call
regarding  any preliminary  matters and may  thereafter meet or speak privately  with any  party
and their respective counsel prior to or during  a mediation session.
Rule 6. Mediation Statem ents:
The Mediator shall provide the Court with periodic reports as to the status of the mediation,
including  but not limited to: whether the parties have scheduled the initial mediation
appointment, whether they are participating  in the mediation process; status of the mediation,
and whether any agreement has been reached. The Court shall advise the Mediator of any and all
adjourn dates of the matter while mediation is ong oing.
Rule 7. Mediation P anel:
1. Qualifications: The Administrative J udge shall establish, and the District ADR
Coordinator shall maintain, a roster of trained mediators (" The Roster" ) for the Prog ram which
shall be available on the applicable Court or Part website within the District. To be elig ible to
join the Roster as a Mediator, a person shall satisfy  the training  and ex perience requirements of
Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative J udge as follows:
2. All Court Roster Mediators shall have received at least:
a. 24 hours of basic mediation training ,
b. 16 hours of additional training  in the specific mediation
techniques applicable to specific subject areas of the t ypes of cases
referred to them.
c. Any additional training  or ex perience required for permanency
mediation.
3. All Court Roster Mediators shall have recent ex perience mediating  actual cases in the
subject area of the t ypes of cases to be referred to them. Mediation ex perience can be
achieved b y:
a. Mediating  at least three (3) Court cases which were filed
within a State or F ederal Court in New York, or
b. Completing  a Court Mediation Apprenticeship, which
shall include:
i. Observing  at least one (1) mediation, reg ardless of
case ty pe;
ii. Co-mediating  three (3) Court cases in the subject area
of the ty pes of cases to be referred to them;
iii. Debriefing  all observations and mediations with a
court roster mediator or ADR Prog ram Contact; and
iv. Evaluation by  a court roster mediator or ADR
Prog ram Contact;
4
Rule 8. CONF IDENTIALITY
Mediation shall be confidential and, except as otherwise provided, any document prepared, or
communications made, by parties, their counsel or a Mediator for, during, or in connection
with the proceeding  shall not be disclosed outside its confines by any participant. No Party to
the proceeding  shall, during  the action referred to mediation or in any other legal matter, seek
to compel production of documents, notes, or other writing s prepared for or generated in
connection with mediation, or the testimony  of any other Party  or the Mediator concerning
communications made during  the proceeding . A settlement, in whole or in part, reached during
mediation shall be set forth in a writing  signed by all parties affected or their duly authoriz ed
agents. Documents and information otherwi se discoverable under New York Law shall not be
shielded from disclosure merely  because they  are submitted or referred to in mediation.
Rule 9. Adm inistration of  Program
This prog ram shall be supervised and coordinated by  the Court Attorney  for the F amily  Court
Judge assig ned to the case, who shall act as the Administrator for the implementation of ADR
for that case.
5