Queens Coun ty Sup reme Court , Com mercial Divisi on
Alter native Dispute Resolution Pr ogram
Mediator  Appli cation1
The Commercial Division’s Alterna tive Disp ute Resolution Prog ram offers mediation in cases
referred by Justices of the court or in cases submitt ed by parties on consent. Those who wish to
become  mediators must (i) have succe ssfully  completed  a minimum  of 40 hours of mediation
training  in an OCA-sponsore d or OCA-re cognized training  program and (ii) have recent
mediation  experience , and (iii) commerc ial law experie nce or equivalent subject matter
expertise deeme d appropr iate by the Administrative Judge. Training  in arbitra tion does not
suffice .
For other prere quisites, please  review Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Admini strative J udge on
Guidelines for Qualifications and Training  of ADR Neutra ls Serving  on Court Rosters, located at
http:// www.ny courts.g ov/rules/chief admin/146.shtml
Mediators who join the R oster mus t be will ing to mediate the first three (3) hours of a session on
a pro bono basis.  Subsequent mediation may be arranged on a private basis subject to Prog ram
Rules.  
Each applicant is reque sted to provide the information called for below along  with a curriculum
vitae or r esume.  
1. BASIC INFORMATION: Please provide name, firm or organization name and address,
phone and f ax numbers and email addr ess.
2. ADMISSIONS: Please li st the y ear of your admiss ion to the New York Bar , and the names of
any other jurisdictions or cour ts where  you are  admitted to prac tice and the  year of admission.
3. EDUCATION: Please list any underg radua te, gradua te, and legal or other degrees,
educa tional instit utions from  which degrees were earned, and the year you obtained the
degree(s).
 Updat ed May 2 0151
4. PROF ESSIONAL BACK GROUND AND EXP ERIENCE: Please summarize your
profe ssional backg round and experience . With respe ct to the firm or organization for which you
currently  work and those for which you previously  worke d, please  list your position, the years of
employment there  and a summary  of the type of work performed, including areas of
specia lization.
5. PUBLICATIONS /PRESENT ATIONS: Please li st relevant publications that you authore d or
relevant pre sentations that y ou have g iven.
6. MEDIATION EXP ERIENCE: Please list all training  programs in mediation for prospec tive
mediators that you have attended, including a descr iption of the program (e.g., basic mediation
training , commerc ial mediatio n training), the number of hours of each course , and the entity  that
prese nted the program. Please state whether  you have been certified as a mediator and provide
details. If you are currently serving  as a mediator, please  identify  the court or organization wher e
you serve . Please provide a reasonable estimate of the number of mediations for which you have
serve d as mediator a nd the number of  mediations in which y ou have r epresented a  party .
7. OTH ER R ELEVANT T  RAINING  OR EXP ERIENCE : Please describe any  other training
or experienc e you believe e nables y ou to serve a s a mediator in c ommercia l matters.
Thank y ou very  much for ta king the  time to complete this form and for  your intere st in our ADR
Prog ram.
Please complete and send this form to Prog ram Administrator Mari a Bradley , Esq., at
mbradley @ny court s.gov or by fax at 718-298-1099, or by mail, 88-11 Sutphin Boule vard, 5th
FL, Jamaica , New Y ork 11435.