FAMILY COURT OF  THE STATE OF  NEW YORK
COUNTY OF  DUTCHESS
HON. JOSEP H A. EG ITTO
HON. DENISE M. WATSON
HON TRACY C. MacK ENZ IE
HON. JEF FREY C. MARTIN
RULES OF  THE F AMILY COURT
ALTERNATIVE DISP UTE RESOLUTION P ROGRAM
PREAMBLE
As set forth in the State Chief Judge’s Excellence Initiative, the Courts of the State of New York
encourag e the resolution of dispute s and the early  settlement of pending  litigation throug h
various settlement procedures. The following  rules govern those cases in Dutchess County
Family  Court which are eligible for Alternative Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) throug h presumptive
mediation. The Rules set forth herein supplement and shall be applied in conjunction with the
General Mediation Rules for the Ninth Judicial District (“Ninth JD Rules”). Any terms not
specifically  defined herein are as defined in the Ninth J D Rules.
Rule 1. P rogram
The Dutchess County  Family Court participates in the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program
(“Prog ram”) instituted by the Ninth Judicial District. Unless otherwise  directed by the Court,
cases refer red to the Prog ram shall be mediated. Cases which qualify  for referral to the Prog ram
shall be those cases that have been designated by the Dutchess County  Family  Cour t as
qualify ing for presump tive mediation, as identified in Rule 2 herein, as well as any eligible cases
where all parties have elected to pursue mediation, and any eligible cases where the Court has
exercised its discretion to refer the cases to mediation.
Rule 2. Cases Qualif ying for Early Intervention of Presum ptive Mediation and
Determ ination of  Suitability
Listed below are those cases which have been desig nated as qualify ing for presumptive
mediation. Unless otherwise directed by the Court,  such cases shall be referred to mediation
utiliz ing the procedures and forms established by  the Ninth J D Rules.
(1)custody /visitation/g uardianship cases, including  modification and/or enforcement of
custody /visitation/g uardianship;
(2)termination of parental rights cases for permanency planning  (once implemented
district- wide);
(3)any cases which do not fall into the list of cases above, but where all parties request
mediation, or where the Court directs the case to go to mediation in the exercise of the
Court’s discretion.
Notwithstanding  the above, any case in which there is an active temporary  or permanent
stay away  order of protection (“OP”) involving  the parties or an active child protective services
(“CPS”) investig ation is not eligible for mediation. Cases in which there is a history  of or ong oing
domestic violence but where there is currently  not an active stay away  order of protect ion may
be deemed inappropriate for mediation, althoug h the existence of domestic violence is not an
automatic prohibition to mediation.
Rule 3. Mediators
Dutchess County ’s Community  Dispute Resolution Center is the Mediation Center of
Dutchess County  (“MCDC”). All eligible custody , visitation or guardianship cases will be
presumptively  referred to the MCDC for mediation.
In the event that the MCDC is not able to take a case, or the parties seek an alternate
mediator, there will be a court roster of approved mediators to which they shall be referred.
Upon  implementation of permanency  planning  mediation in Dutchess County  Family  Court,
such cases shall be referred to a Mediator from the court roster.
Unless otherwise directed by the Court, the Mediator shall  be compensated in accordance
with the Ninth JD Rules, including  those provisions allowing  for exemptions from the parties
having to pay for mediator compensation and those provisions allowing  for portions of the
Mediator’s time to be non-compensable.
Rule 4. Subject Matter Rules:
Custody /Visitation/Guardianship Cases:
At the time of the filing  all custody , visitation and guardianship petitions will be initially
screened for early  intervention presumptive mediation eligibility . For those cases initially
deemed eligible for mediation, the Court will provide to the petitione r, and include in the service
packet to the respondent, information about mediation and the services offered by the MCDC.
Such information will include contact information for the MCDC and directions on how to
initiate the mediation process.
Unless a determination is made that a case is inelig ible or the Judge presiding  over the
matter believes that, based upon the particular facts and circumstances of the case, that mediation
would not be benefici al or appropriate, the matter shall be referred to mediation. At the first
appearance where both parties to the action are present, the Judge will refer the matter to
mediation throug h either the MCDC, or a mediator from the roster, utiliz ing the procedures and
forms established by the Ninth JD Rules. Attorney s for the children and parties may be assigned
prior to or at the first appearance.
If there is a representat ive from the MCDC in Court at the time that the case is heard the matter
will be placed on second call in order to allow the parties to speak to the representative and start
the intake process, including  hopefully  scheduling  the initial mediatio n session. Otherwise, a
written referral will be sent to the mediator and the parties. The parties will be directed to contact
the mediator within a specified time period in order to start the process.
The matter will then be adjourned for a sufficient period of time to allow the mediation
process to commence. Generally , the Court will adjourn the matter for a period of 30-45 days for
this to occur. The Judge presiding  over the matte r may adjust the length of adjournment, taking
into consideration the particular facts and circumstances of the case and the dates of the initial
mediation session, if known.
The Court shall the direct the Medi ator to provide a report to the Court prior to the return
date containing  limited information such as: whether the intake proce ss has been completed, the
dates of any future  mediation session, and the status of mediation.  The Court will notify  the
Mediator of the nex t court date.
If the parties are engaged in mediation, and the parties and Mediato r believe that it
would be beneficial for the mediation process to continue, the matter may be further adjourned for
a period of time at the discretion of the Family Court Judge presiding  over the case.
Alternatively , if the Family Court Judge receives information that the parties did not participate,
the mediation process is not advancing  or that an agreement has not been reached, the Judge may
advance the case as his or her calendar permits and the case will prog ress according ly.
After completion of the mediation, upon request of a party , or upon its own initiative, the
Family  Court Judge, in his or her discretion, may issue an order directing  a second referral to
mediation. Any such referral shall be entertained and ordered as early  as practicable and shall be
administered in accordance with these rules and the Ninth J D Rules.
Permanency  Planning  Mediation and Other Ty pes of Cases: 
It is anticipated that once permanency  planning  mediation is implemented in Dutchess
County  that the above rules will be adjusted as needed based upon the nature of the case and any
releva nt statutory  time limitations. For other types of cases, the parties will not initially  be
provided with the informational packet at the time of filing  but the remainder of the rules shall
remain the same.
Rule 5. Discovery P rotocols:
Unless otherwise directed by the Mediator, five days prior to the first scheduled
mediation session each party  shall deliver to the Media tor a copy of that party ’s pleading s
(including any amended pleadings or attachments), copies of any current
custody /visitation/g uardianship orders or Judgment of Divorce relating  to the custody  of the
children together with a pre-medi ation memorandum (not to exceed five pages) setting  forth their
view of the facts and proposed resolution. Except as otherwise agreed, this memorandum shall
not be served upon the adversary  or filed in Court, shall be read only by the Mediator, and shall be
destroy ed by the Mediator immediately  upon completion of the mediation. In the event that any
interim orders are issued  by the Court while the mediation process is ongoing, the parties shall
deliver a copy  of such order to the mediator.
Rule 6. Mediation Statem ents:
The Mediator shall provide the Court with periodic reports as to the status of the mediation,
includin g but not limited to: whether the parties have scheduled the initial mediation
appointment,
whether they are participating  in the mediation  process; status of the mediation, and whether any
agreement has been reached . The Court shall advise the Mediator of any and all adjourn dates of
the matter while mediation is ong oing.
Rule 7. Mediation P anel:
The MCDC is the primary  mediation resource for Dutchess County  Family  Court for
eligible cases involving  custody , visitation and guardianship. The MCDC does not handle
permanency  planning  mediation. Any cases which the MCDC is unable to handle would be
referred to a mediator from the court roster of approved mediators.
Rule 8. Training f or Mediators:
All mediators handling  Family  Court matters must successfully  complet e the mediation
training  as required by Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge as well as any
additional advanced training  as required by the Ninth JD Rules in order to be eligible to be on
the court roster. Such advanced training  should include training  in custody /visitation, domestic
violence and, once implemented, permanency  mediation. Mediators handling  family  court
matters throug h the MCDC receive advanced training  in custody /visita tion and domestic
violence.
Rule 9. Adm inistration of  Program
This program shall be supervised and coordinated by the Court Attorney  for the Family
Court Judge assig ned to the case, who shall act as the Administrator for the implementation of
ADR for that case.