1 
 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK , 
COUNTY OF NEW YORK  
PRESENT: HON. 
Justice/Referee
---------------------------------- ------------------------------- X 
 
Plaintiff, 
 
-against- 
 
 
Defendant. 
--------------------------------------- --------------------------X Part: 
Index No.: 
ORDER OF REFERENCE  TO 
MATRIMONIAL NEUTRAL 
EVALUATION PROGRAM
1. On consent of the parties, the following issues are hereby referred to the Neutral  Evaluation 
Program and shall be conducted in accordance with the Program’s  Statement of Procedures . 
Issue(s) to be addressed at Neutral Ev aluation: 
                 
         
               
             
             
     
4. At least five business days before the neutral evaluation session, counsel shall simultaneously 
exchange and submit to the Neutral Evaluator a concise, two -page summary of the issue 
presented, relevant facts and applicable law, if any.  Counsel shall also submit (and exchange 
if not yet exchanged) a copy of his/her client’s sworn statem ent of net worth. 2.Counsel for the parties shall complete this form and, once it has been so-ordered, the court  
shall send it to the ADR office by e-mail at ADR-1JD@nycourts.gov , subject line: MNEP.
3.The Program Coordinator shall forward to counsel for the parties a Notice of Confirmation
with a
 list of three Neutral Evaluators, from which counsel shall select one in accordance
with the Program’s Statement of Procedures . The parties shall appear at the initial session
within 45 days of receiving the Notice of Confirmation.
2 
 5. The parties and their counsel agree that they shall comply with the Program’s  
Statement of Procedures, including the provisions regarding confi dentiality and immunity.  
Parties and/or counsel further understand and agree that no attorney -client relationship exists 
between the Neutral Evaluator and the parties, and that the Neutral Evaluator may not provide 
legal advice to the parties.  
6. The attorneys for the parties herein are as follows:  
For Plaintiff: For Defendant: 
Address: Address: 
Phone: Phone: 
Email: Email: 
 
For Child: 
Address: 
Phone: 
Email: 
THIS SPACE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK - CONTINUE TO PAGE 3
3 
 7. The parties shall appear for a status conference before the court on  
at                                     . 
 
Signature of Plaintiff  Signature of Defendant  
 
Signature of Counsel for Plaintiff  Signature of Counsel for Defendant  
Dated:  
 New York, New York  SO ORDERED:  
J.S.C. or Court Attorney -Referee  