 
1 
 SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK 
COUNTY OF NEW YORK 
PRESENT: Hon. 
Justice/Referee
---------------------------------- ------------------------------- X 
 
Plaintiff, 
 
-against- 
 
 
Defendant. 
--------------------------------------- --------------------------X Part: 
Index No.: 
ORDER OF REFERENCE   
ON CONSENT TO NEUTRAL 
EVALUATION PROGRAM
1. On consent of the parties, the following issues are hereby referred to the Neutral Evaluation 
Program and shall be conducted in accordance with the Program’s Statement of Procedures . 
Issue(s) to be addressed at Neutral Evaluation:  
2. This form shall be executed by counsel for the parties and so ordered.  
3. The Program Coordinator shall forward to counsel for the parties a Notice of Confirmation 
with a list of three Neutral Evaluators, from which counsel shall select one in accordance 
with the Program’s Statement of Procedures. 
4. Within five (5) business days of receiving the N otice of Confirmation, counsel shall select 
one of the three proposed Neutral Evaluators, and inform the Coordinator via email at  
ADR-1JD@nycourts.gov  of their selection. If counsel for the parties cannot agree,  each side 
shall have the right within five business days to object to one of the selected Neutral 
Evaluators. The remaining Neutral Evaluator shall serve as the Neutral Evaluator, provided 
that there is no conflict of interest. If there is a conflict with  the remaining Neutral Evaluator, 
counsel shall promptly send an email to the Coordinator. The Coordinator shall randomly 
 
2 
 select names of three additional Neutral Evaluators, and the process described above shall be 
repeated.  
5. Once a Neutral Evaluator is se lected, counsel for both parties shall together contact the 
Neutral within 72 hours to schedule the first session. Counsel shall also notify the Program 
Coordinator of the Neutral Evaluator selected. The Program Coordinator shall provide the 
selected Neutr al Evaluator with this Order of Reference.  
6. The parties and counsel shall appear at the initial session within 45 days of receiving from the 
Program Coordinator a Notice of Confirmation with the names of the Neutral Evaluators.  
The Neutral Evaluation shall  be completed within 60 days of confirmation of the Neutral .  
The deadline for completion may be extended by order of the Court on consent of the parties 
and the Neutral Evaluator based on the particular circumstances of the case.  
7. At least five (5) business days before the Neutral Evaluation session, the parties’ counsel shall 
simultaneously exchange and submit to the Neutral Evaluator a concise two -page summary of 
the issue(s) presented, relevant facts and applicable law, if any.  
8. Within five (5) bus iness days after the conclusion of the Neutral Evaluation session, the 
Neutral Evaluator shall send a Report (“Report of the Neutral”) to the Program Coordinator 
and to counsel for the parties confirming that the Neutral Evaluation has been completed.  
The Coordinator shall forward the report to the Referring Justice. The Neutral Evaluator shall 
not disclose any substantiative information discussed during the Neutral Evaluation, except as 
described in Section IX of the Statement of Procedures.  
9. The parties shall report to the Court whether the case or any discrete issue(s) have been 
“resolved” or “not resolved .” If “resolved ,” the parties shall p repare and execute a stipulation 
for submission to the Court.  
 
3 
 10. The parties and their counsel agree that they shall comply with the Program’s  
Statement of Procedures , including the provisions regarding confidentiality and immunity.  
Parties and/or counsel further understand and agree that no attorney -client relationship exists 
between the Neutral Evaluator and the parties, and that the Neutral Evaluator may not provide 
legal advice to the parties.  
11. The attorneys for the parties herein are as follows:  
For Plaintiff: For Defendant: 
Address: Address: 
Phone: Phone: 
Email: Email: 
 
12. The parties shall appear for a status conference before the court on  
at                                     . 
 
 
Signature of Plaintiff  Signature of Defendant  
 
Signature of Counsel for Plaintiff  Signature of Counsel for Defendant  
Dated: 
 New York, New York  SO ORDERED: 
J.S.C. or Court Attorney -Referee 