SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH 
WESTCHESTER COUNTY 
STATEMENT OF PROCEDURES  
PRES UMPTIVE
MATRIMONIAL MEDIATION PROGRAM 
PREA MBLE
 
It is the policy  of the Courts of  this State, as set f orth in the State Chief  Judg e’s
Excellence Initiativ e, to encourag e the resolution of  disputes and the early  settlem ent of
pending  litigation throug h various settlem ent procedures. T he W estchester County
Suprem e Court Matrim onial Part desires to use m ediation as one m ethod of  settling
disputes. T he benef its to the parties are m any, not only  in a sav ings of time and m oney ,
but also in prov iding a result in w hich all parties benef it. The follow ing Rules shall
govern cases w hich q ualify for Alternativ e Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) throug h
presum ptive mediation and optional m ediation.  T he Rules set f orth herein are intended
to apply  in the W estchester Suprem e Court Matrim onial Part.  T hese Rules supplem ent
and shall be applied in tandem  with the Rules of  the Alternativ e Dispute Resolution
Prog ram for the Ninth Judicial District (the “Ninth JD Rules”).  Capitaliz ed term s to the
extent not def ined herein are as def ined in the Ninth JD Rules.
Rule 1 . Program:
The W estchester Suprem e Court Matrim onial Part, em ploys the Alternativ e Dispute
Resolution Prog ram instituted by  the Ninth Judicial District.  Unless otherw ise directed
by the Court, cases ref erred to the Prog ram shall be m ediated.  A roster of  private
mediators has been established f or this purpose and, in addition, one Court Attorney
Referee trained in m ediation.  Cases w hich q ualify for ref erral to the Prog ram shall be
those cases that hav e been desig nated by  the Court as q ualifying for presum ptive
mediation, as identif ied in Rule 2 herein, as w ell as any  cases w here all parties hav e
elected to pursue m ediation, and any  cases w here the Court has ex ercised its
discretion to ref er the cases to m ediation.  
Rule 2 . Cases Qualify ing for Presumptiv e Mediation and Determination of
Suitability :
Listed below  are those cases w hich hav e been desig nated as q ualifying for
presum ptive mediation.  All such cases shall be ref erred to m ediation utiliz ing the
procedures and f orms established by  the Ninth JD Rules.  T hose f orms enable parties
and/or their counsel to identif y whether their case q ualifies for mediation. T he Court w ill
review such f orms to conf irm that the case does q ualify, in w hich ev ent the m ediation
shall be initiated, and an Order of  Reference issued in accordance w ith the Ninth JD
Rules.  T he follow ing cases are deem ed to q ualify for presum ptive mediation:
A.PRESUMPT IVE MEDIAT ION
1. Matrim onial Actions w ithout children
2. Matrim onial Actions w ith children and parents are W -2 em ployees 
3. Any case w here the parties req uest m ediation
B.EXCLUSION FROM MEDIAT ION
Matrim onial actions, inv olving alleg ations of  dom estic v iolence, cases inv olving
child abuse or neg lect (as def ined in Fam ily Court Act § 1012(e) and (f ) and Social
Services Law  § 412), dom estic v iolence, or a sev ere pow er im balance betw een the
parties and/or w here tem porary  or perm anent Orders of  Protection hav e been
issued are not appropriate f or ref erral to the Prog ram.  Cases w ill be screened to
avoid inappropriate ref errals.
Rule 3.  REFERRA L TO THE PROGRA M AND ONGOING LITIGA TION:
Cases m ay be ref erred to Mediation at any time including  the prelim inary
conference (w hich is ty pically  when ref errals are m ade).  A party  who attends the initial
session com plies w ith the Order of  Reference, ev en if that party  ultim ately  chooses not
to proceed w ith m ediation.
Referral to the Prog ram will not stay  the court proceeding s in any  respect.  T he
“no stay ” policy  recog nizes the special need f or prom pt action in m atrim onial and f amily
proceeding s.  Full discov ery, emergency  and pendente lite  relief , family dynamics, and
the needs of  children req uire ong oing access to the Court. 
Rule 4. Roster of Mediators and Compensation:
The Adm inistrativ e Judg e for the Ninth Judicial District shall establish and m aintain a
Roster of  Mediators f or the Court (“the Roster”).
(i) In order to be elig ible to serv e as a Mediator and be listed on the Roster, a
person shall possess the f ollow ing qualifications and such others as m ay
hereaf ter be prom ulgated:  (a) A m ediator m ust hav e com pleted at least the
amount and ty pe of  training  required by  Part 146 of  the Rules of  the Chief
-2-
Administrator; (b) hav e recent ex perience m ediating  divorce, custody , visitation
and eq uitable distribution cases, and any  other m ediation training  or ex perience
deem ed appropriate by  the Court; and (c) com ply with the Ninth Judicial
District’s  Standards of  Conduct f or Mediators. . 
•NOTE:  Cases involving  financial issues will be referred only  to those Mediators with
knowledg e of, training  in and ex perience with financial aspects of divorce. Cases involving
issues relating  to decision-making  for a child or parenting  time with a child shall be referred only
those Mediators with knowledg e of, training  in and ex perience with such issues.
(ii) Continuing  presence on the Roster is subject to rev iew by the Adm inistrativ e
Judg e. Mediators m ay be rem oved from the Roster at the discretion of  the
Administrativ e Judg e.
(iii) The Roster w ill be av ailable throug h the Court’s w ebsite (w ww.nycourts.g ov).
(iv)Unless otherw ise directed by  the Court, the Mediator shall be com pensated in
accordance w ith the Ninth JD Rules, including  those prov isions allow ing for
exemptions f rom parties hav ing to pay  for mediator com pensation and those
provisions allow ing for portions of  the Mediator’s tim e to be non-com pensable.
Rule 5. Procedure;  Automatic Disclosures:
(i) Unless otherw ise directed by  the Mediator, at least ten day s before the f irst
mediation session, each party  shall deliv er to the Mediator a copy  of that party ’s
marked pleading s (including  responsiv e pleading s) together w ith a pre-m ediation
memorandum  in the f orm set f orth in the Ninth JD Rules.   Ex cept as otherw ise
agreed, this m emorandum  shall not be serv ed on the adv ersary  or filed in Court,
shall be read only  by the Mediator, and shall be destroy ed by  the Mediator
immediately  upon com pletion of  the m ediation.
(ii) Unless otherw ise ag reed by  the parties and the Mediator, or as directed by  the
Mediator, w ithin ten day s of the f iling of the Order of  Reference pursuant to the
Ninth JD Rules, the parties shall ex chang e information as specif ied in the
Mediation Disclosure Protocols annex ed hereto as Schedule 1.  Disclosure f or
mediation purposes shall be consistent w ith the ef ficient resolution of  the case. 
Unless otherw ise directed by  the Court or Mediator or ag reed to by  the parties, the
timeframe cov ering  information to be produced pursuant to the Mediation
Disclosure Protocols shall be f rom the earliest date by  which the statute of
limitations on any  claim  asserted in the action beg an to accrue.
-3-
(iii) The Court Attorney  Referees superv ising discov ery shall hav e the discretion to
modify the deadlines f or initiation and com pletion of  the m ediation process,
including  the discretion to lim it req uired disclosure or to allow  for additional
disclosure bey ond that w hich is ex chang ed pursuant to the Mediation Disclosure
Protocols prior to the initiation of  the m ediation process. 
Rule 6. Continuation of Mediation after Expiration of the 45-Day  Period:
If the m atter has not been entirely  resolv ed w ithin the 45-day  period as prov ided in the
Ninth JD Rules, but the parties and the Mediator believ e that it w ould be benef icial if
the m ediation process w ere to continue, the process m ay go forward, but in such ev ent,
there shall be no ex tension or stay  of the proceeding s unless otherw ise prov ided by  the
Ninth JD Rules or leav e is g ranted by  a Justice of  the Court.
Rule 7. Further Mediation:
After com pletion of  the m ediation, or upon req uest of  a party  or upon its ow n initiativ e,
the Court Attorney  Referee or Superv ising Justice, in his or her discretion, m ay issue
an order directing  a second ref erral to the Prog ram. Any  such ref erral shall be
entertained and ordered as early  as practicable and shall be adm inistered in
accordance w ith these and the Ninth JD Rules.  
Rule 8. A dministration of Program:  
The Prog ram shall be superv ised and coordinated by  the Rosem ary Palladino
Telephone:  914-824-5337 Em ail:  rpalladi@ nycourts.g ov who shall act as the
Administrator f or the im plem entation of  ADR f or that case.
-4-
Schedule 1
WESTCHESTER MATRI MONI AL ACTI ONS
The parties shall ex chang e and provide the Mediator with the following  documents:
1.  A copy  of their Statement of Net W orth
2.  The three most recently  filed F ederal and State tax  returns
3.  Current salary  information and pay checks
4. Current  Deferred Compensation Statements
5. Any  and all information related to the ownership, value, and equity  of 
the marital residence.  
At any stage, the Mediator may request a party  to submi t additional information as the Mediator
deems appropriate.
  
-5-