 STATE OF NEW YORK  
UNIFIED COURT SYSTEM  
FIRST JUDICIAL DISTRICT  
SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH  
60 CENTRE STREET  
NEW YORK, NY 1 0007 -1474   
LAWRENCE K. MARKS  
Chief Administrative Judge  
DEBORAH A. KAPLAN  
Deputy Chief Administrative Judge  
New York City Courts  ADAM SILVERA  
Administrative Judge for Civil Matters  
First Judicial District
 
SUPREME COURT, CIVIL BRANCH  
NEW YORK COUNTY  
NEUTRAL EVALUATION PROGRAM  
STATEMENT OF PROCEDURES  
I.  OVERVIEW  
Neutral Evaluation is a confidential alternative dispute resolution process that may result 
in faster, more convenient, less expensive, and less acrimonious settlement than might be the 
case in the normal course  of litigation. In Neutral Evaluation, a neutral third party —the Neutral 
Evaluator — hears abbreviated case presentations by the parties and counsel, provides an 
informal assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the arguments and may offer a non -
binding opinion. Neutral Evaluators have significant experience in their specifi ed area of law and 
specific training in Neutral Evaluation. Their assessments and opinions may help parties to 
analyze the case, facilitate discussion, and generate a settlement.  
The Early Neutral Evaluation Program (the “ENEP ” or the “Program ”) offers parties 
access, free of charge, to qualified Neutral Evaluators who meet the criteria set out in Section VI . 
The goal of the ENEP is to assist the parties  and their counsel in reaching a resolution or to 
decide a discrete issue or issues. Although parties are not obligated to settle in Neutral 
Evaluation, parties often resolve the discrete issue or issues referred to the Neutral.  

2 The presence of counsel for  each party at all Neutral Evaluation sessions is required, and 
parties shall attend the Neutral Evaluation session with their attorneys. Referral to the Program is 
not appropriate where only one party is represented by counsel, or in cases of domestic vio lence, 
child abuse, or a severe power imbalance1. 
All Neutral Evaluation sessions may be conducted remotely.  
Visit our website  for more information.  
II. DEFINITIONS2 
“Neutral” shall refer to Neutral Evaluators.  
“Neutral Evaluation” refers to a confidential, non -binding process in which a neutral third 
party (the Neutral Evaluator) with expertise in the subject matter relating to the dispute provides 
an assessment of likely court outcomes to help parties reach a settlement.  
III.  PROCEDURES  
The assigned Part Justice may, at any point in the  litigation, refer parties to the Program 
on consent. Cases involving child abuse or neglect (as defined in Family Court Act § 1012  (e) 
and (f) and Social Services Law § 412), domestic violence, or a severe power imbalance between 
the parties are not appro priate for referral to the Program. Cases will be screened to avoid 
inappropriate referrals.  
To begin the process, the Court issues an Order of Reference on consent of the parties. 
The Order of Reference may specify any discrete issues to be submitted to t he Program or simply 
refer the case for resolution. The Order shall direct parties and counsel to attend a free session 
with a Neutral Evaluator from the Program ’s Roster of Neutrals.  
 
 1 Matrimonial cases should be referred to the New York County Supreme Court Matrimonial Neutral 
Evaluation Program ( MNEP ). All cases referred to the MNEP are screened prio r to assignment for 
domestic violence, child abuse and serious imbalance of power.  
 
2 The definitions for this Program are established in Part 146  of the Rules of the Chief Administrative Judge . 
3 The Order of Reference shall contain the control date set by the referri ng Justice for the 
parties to appear in Court for a conference following the Neutral Evaluation session. All pre -trial 
proceedings scheduled in the Preliminary Conference order shall continue and shall not be stayed 
pending the Neutral Evaluation. If all p arties request, the referring Justice may agree to extend 
dates given the particular circumstances presented.  
The Coordinator shall randomly select the names of three Neutral Evaluators. Next, the 
Coordinator shall send to the parties a Notice of Confirmat ion with the three names. Within five 
(5) business days of receiving the Notice of  Confirmation, counsel shall select one of the three 
proposed Neutral Evaluators, and inform the Coordinator of their selection. If counsel for the 
parties cannot agree, each  side shall have the right within the said five (5) business days to object 
to one of the selected Neutral Evaluators. The remaining Neutral Evaluator shall serve as the 
Neutral Evaluator, provided there is no conflict of interest (as identified in Section XI  herein). If 
there is a conflict with the remaining Neutral Evaluator, counsel shall promptly send an email to 
the Coordinator at ADR -1JD@nycourts.gov  within ten (10) business days of receipt of the 
Notice of Con firmation with a copy to the other side. The Coordinator shall randomly select 
names of three additional Neutral Evaluators, and the process described above shall be repeated.  
Once counsel select the Neutral, counsel will jointly contact the Neutral within  72 hours 
by conference call or email to schedule the first session, which may take place remotely.  
Parties and counsel are required to appear at the Neutral Evaluation session within forty -
five (45) days of receiving a Notice of Confirmation. The Neutral Evaluation shall be completed 
within sixty (60) days of the initial meeting . The deadline for completion may be extended by 
order of the referring Justice on consent of the parties and the neutral evaluator based on the 
particular circumstances of the case . 
 The parties ’ counsel shall simultaneously exchange and submit to the Neutral Evaluator 
a concise, two -page summary of the issue(s) presented, relevant facts, and applicable law, if any. 
This exchange and submission shall be made so that the Neutral Eval uator receives such 
submissions at least five (5) business days before the scheduled Neutral Evaluation. The Neutral 
Evaluator may request limited, additional information mindful of the additional cost this may 
4 cause the respective parties to incur. The Ne utral Evaluator may further request a conference call 
with both attorneys regarding any preliminary matters.  
Within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the Neutral Evaluation session, the 
Neutral Evaluator shall send a Report ( “Report of the Neu tral”) to the Coordinator and to counsel 
for the parties stating only that the Neutral Evaluation has been completed. The Coordinator shall 
forward the Report to the Referring Justice. The Neutral Evaluator shall not disclose any  
substantive information di scussed during the Neutral Evaluation, except as described in  
Section  IX. 
The parties shall report to the Court whether the case or any discrete issue or issues have 
been “resolved ” or “not resolved. ” If “resolved ,” the parties shall prepare and execute a 
stipulation for submission to the Court.  
IV.  ROLE OF THE NEUTRAL  
The Neutral Evaluator is an expert in the subject matter of the issues referred, who hears 
abbreviated case presentations and provides a non -binding  assessment of the merits of the 
respective claims in an effort to facilitate settlement. The Neutral Evaluator is not an advocate 
and may give an opinion as to likely court outcomes. At the parties ’ request, the Neutral 
Evaluator may also provide settlement assistance. The Neutral Evaluator can also recommend 
that the Court direct the case to a court connected mediation program if the Neutral Evaluator 
believes this would be beneficial.  
All communica tions are confidential (with narrow exceptions outlined below) and will 
not be disclosed to the Justice hearing the case or in any other judicial or administrative 
proceeding. The Neutral Evaluator shall also explain that either party is free at any time t o end 
the Neutral Evaluation and return to Court.  
During the Neutral Evaluation, each side relates the facts of the dispute and raises 
particular issues of concern. The Neutral Evaluator may ask clarifying questions related to the 
issues submitted.  
5 At some  point in the process, the parties can opt to explore settlement. If this occurs, 
either party or the party ’s counsel may request a caucus. Caucuses are meetings that each side 
may have alone with the Neutral Evaluator to explore the possibility of settlem ent. During the 
caucus, the Neutral Evaluator may explore how the parties view the dispute and the impact of 
any proposed solutions. The Neutral Evaluator keeps confidential the information discussed in 
caucus unless the party permits disclosure. In discus sing whether to caucus, the Neutral 
Evaluator shall explain to the parties the risks of separate meetings in the context of an 
evaluative process where one party is unaware of what the other is saying to the Neutral, is 
unable to respond to what is said, a nd is unable to determine how that might influence the 
Neutral Evaluator ’s assessments. To guard against this risk, Neutral Evaluators sometimes place 
“in their pocket ” their handwritten assessment of a likely court outcome before they agree to 
caucus or a ttempt to settle the case3. 
By committing to paper their assessment and placing it out of view, Neutral Evaluators 
avoid being influenced by what they learn during a caucus and can retrieve their initial 
assessment if the parties cannot settle and request  the Neutral Evaluator ’s evaluation.  
V.  THE ROLE OF PARTIES  and COUNSEL  
Experience has demonstrated that party participation — as opposed to exclusive 
participation by counsel — not only increases the likelihood of settlement, but also improves 
compliance  with any agreed -upon terms and enhances the parties ’ satisfaction. Accordingly,  
unless exempted by the Neutral for good cause shown, the parties shall be present during the 
Neutral Evaluation session.  
VI.  THE ROSTER OF NEUTRALS  
The Program has assembled a Roster of approved neutrals who have completed Neutral 
Evaluation training and possess significant and substantive legal experience in civil matters.   
 
3 See Model Rule of Professional Conduct for the Neutral Lawyer . 
6 Attorneys who wish to join the Roster must submit an application .4 
The Coordinator shall confer with the Administrative Judge as to any applicant ’s 
admission to the roster . 
VII.  FEES  
The Program does not charge or administer fees.  
VIII.  IMMUNITY  
Neutrals serving in this program shall be immune from suit as a result of any conduct or 
omission during the performance of duties in that capacity to the extent permissible by law.  
IX.  CONFIDENTIALITY  
Except as set forth below, all oral, written , or other communications made during the   
course of the Neutral Evaluation shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed in any present or 
future judicial or administrative proceeding. Similarly, all information generated in or in 
connection with the N eutral Evaluation — including memoranda, work product or case files of a 
Neutral Evaluator — shall remain confidential and not be subject to disclosure in any present or 
future judicial or administrative proceeding. However, Neutral Evaluation shall not be  used as a 
shield with respect to otherwise discoverable documents or information produced or occurring 
prior to or outside of the Neutral Evaluation process.  
Moreover, except as set forth below, nothing about the substance of the Neutral  
Evaluation, such as the weaknesses or strengths of the parties ’ case or the relative willingness of 
parties to discuss settlement proposals, shall be revealed to the referring Justice, or to any other 
person by the Neutral Evaluator or any party or attorney. The parties sh all report to the Court 
whether the case or any discrete issue or issues have been “resolved ” or “not resolved. ” If 
“resolved ,” the parties shall prepare and execute a stipulation for submission to the Court.  
 
4 The training and qual ifications guidelines for the Program are derived from and in certain aspects 
exceed the minimum requirements established in Part 146  of the Rules of the Chief Administrative 
Judge.  
7 Notwithstanding these confidentiality provisions, communications and information may 
be subject to disclosure in any present or future judicial or administrative proceeding i n any of 
the following five circumstances:  
1. Attendance  
Whether the parties and their counsel attended the initial session will be reported to the 
referring Justice . 
2. Waiver  
Parties to the Neutral Evaluation and the Neutral Evaluator agree in writing to waive  
confidentiality. The waiver must specify the individual communication(s) or information that 
will be disclosed, the person or entity to whom the disclosure will be made, and the purpose of 
the disclosure.  
3. Written Agreement  
Any agreements reached during th e Neutral Evaluation shall be memorialized by counsel 
in a stipulation and submitted to the Court for review. Only those signed agreements that have 
become Court orders may be admissible in any present or future judicial or administrative 
proceeding. Addit ionally, a limited report of the outcome, as explained in Section  III, will be 
sent to the referring Justice . 
4. Threats of Imminent, Serious Harm  
If communication s or information constitutes a credible threat of serious and imminent 
harm, either to the speaker or another person or entity, the appropriate authorities and/or the 
potential victim may be notified.  
5. Allegations of Child Abuse or Neglect  
If communication s or information relates to an allegation of child abuse or neglect as 
defined in Family Court Act § 1012  (e) and (f) and Social Services Law § 412 and for which 
disclosure is required pursuant to Social Services Law § 413.  
8 X.  REFERRAL TO THE PROGRAM AND O NGOING LITIGATION  
Cases may be referred to Neutral Evaluation on consent of the parties at any time, 
including at the preliminary conference.  
Referral to the Program will not stay the court proceedings. The “no stay ” policy 
recognizes the special need for prompt action in all proceedings  and the directive by the Chief 
Judge regarding Standards and Goals.  
XI.  AVOIDING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST  
Before accepting a Neutral Evaluation, a Neutral Evaluator shall make an inquiry that is 
reasonable under the circumsta nces to determine whether there are any known facts that a 
reasonable individual would consider likely to affect the impartiality of the Neutral Evaluator, 
including a financial or personal interest in the outcome, and an existing or past relationship with  
a party, the party’s attorneys, or a foreseeable participant in the Neutral Evaluation. The Neutral 
Evaluator shall disclose any such known conflict to the parties and counsel as soon as possible 
before accepting a referral. If unable to function in a fai r and impartial manner, the Neutral 
Evaluator shall notify counsel for the parties and the Coordinator . The Coordinator  shall 
thereafter promptly provide counsel for the parties with a Notice of Confirmation containing the 
names of three different Neutral Evaluators.  
Dated: September  16, 2022 
 
SUPREME  COURT, CIVIL BRANCH  
NEW YORK COUNTY  
Dejana M. Perrone, Esq.  
ADR  Coordinator  
60 Centre Street, Rm. 1 19M  
New York, N Y 10007  
Phone: 21 2-256-7956  
Email: dperrone@nycourts.gov  
ADR Office Email: ADR -1JD@nycourts.gov  