3rd JD ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION (ADR) PARTICIPANT 
STATEMENT OF UNDERSTANDING  
 
1. We understand that if a Neutral from the Roster was  selected by the Court , the first ninety (90) 
minutes of the initial ADR session  will be free as well as the Neutrals preparation time for the first 90 -
minute session.  Thereafter , if we agree to continue ADR past the first 90 -minutes, we  will be billed at no 
more than $350.00 per hour (per the “Neutral Fee Agreement”).   
 
2. We understand that ADR is voluntary; we c an choose which points to  discuss.  
 
3. We understand that if we do not work out an issue or resolve our case, we can return to  Court.  
 
4. We understand that we are each free to talk with a lawyer now, during or after the ADR session(s).  
 
5. We understand that the N eutral is not acting as a lawyer for either of us and will not be providing  
legal advice or opinions on the law. The Neutral may share with us legal  information.  
 
6. Except for allegations of child abuse or neglect, threats of imminent serious harm and inform ation 
regarding the scheduling, attendance and participation at ADR sessions, and the Neutral’s  report, we 
understand that what is said during this process is confidential. The Neutral agrees not to reveal any 
oral or written communications to others witho ut the consent of all  parties.  
 
7. We agree that if we do go to court, we will not testify about what happened in ADR, however, 
documents and information otherwise discoverable under the CPLR shall not be shielded  from discovery 
merely because they are submitted or referred to in  ADR. 
 
8. We will not ask the Neutral or the other party to testify or give evidence about what happened in  the 
ADR session(s) and we will not demand anything prepared for ADR or compel the Neutral to produce 
any documents prepared for ADR or notes of the Neutral unless it is allowed by  law. 
 
9. We understand that the Neutral shall be immune from suit, indemnified and held harmless to  the 
extent allowed by  law. 
 
 
 
Plaintiff/Petitioner  Defendant/Respondent  
 
 
(Print  Name)  (Print  Name)  
 
 
Attorney  for Plaintiff/Petitioner  Attorney for  Defendant/Respondent  
 
 
(Print  Name)  (Print  Name)  
 
 
 
Neutral  Date  