ROCKLAND COUNTY FAMILY COURT
RUL ES OF  THE
ALTERNATI VE DI SPUTE RESOL UTION PROGRAM
I.Statement of the Court Prog ram
The Rockland County  Family  Court Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Prog ram
offers parties access to qualified mediators in an effort to resolve disputes without litig ation.
Cases1 will be presumptively  referred to a Mediator upon filing  of the petition with the Rockland
Family  Court with either a Mediator from the Conflict Dispute Resolution Center (CDRC) or
from a Roster of Neutrals. W here the case is referred to the CDRC, the initial mediation session
will be scheduled concomitant with the initial appearance date before the J udge, Court Attorney -
Referee, or Support Mag istrate; the parties will appear before the Court and then immediately  go
into the initial mediation session in a conference room in the courthouse. W here the case is
presumptively  referred to a Roster Neutral, the parties will be ex pected to initiate the mediation
process in advance of their initial appearance date before the Court.
The rules set forth below apply  to the Rockland County  Family  Court and will operate
concurrently  with the Rules of the ADR Prog ram for the Ninth J udicial District, which will
define and outline the district-wide operation of the ADR Prog ram.
II.Case Ty pes Referred for Presumptive Mediation
PHASE ONE (com mencing Septem ber 1, 2019 and continuing until F ebruary 28, 2020):
Case ty pes in Phase One to be presumptively  referred to Mediation include:
• Initial Custody /Visitation cases, with no prior court action/history .
Up to four (4) cases p er week will b e presumptively referred  to med iation
with the CDRC;
Up to four (4) cases p er week will b e presumptively referred  to med iation
with a Roster Neu tral.
PHASE TWO (com mencing March 1, 2020 and continuing until August 31, 2020):
Case ty pes in Phase Two to be presumptively  referred to Mediation include:
• Initial Custody /Visitation cases, with no prior court action/history ; and
• Initial Custody /Visitation/Guardianship cases with prior case history  in either Supreme
or Family  Court; and
1 Cases th at will not be appropriate f or mediation are th ose where o nly one party is rep resen ted by counsel, o r in
cases co ntaining alleg ations of domestic v iolence, ch ild abuse or neglect, o r another articu lated  severe p ower
imbalance. T he Court will screen  for these issu es/dynamics at th e tim e of the filing of the pleadings, and then again
at the initial ap pearan ce to  insure that only appropriate cases are b eing referred  to mediation.
1
• Modification/Violation of custody /visitation order cases with prior history  in
either Supreme or F amily  Court.
Up to six ( 6) cases p er week will b e presumptively referred  to med iation with  the CDRC;
Up to ten (10) cases p er week will b e presumptively referred  to med iation with  a Roster Neu tral.
PHASE THREE (com mencing Septem ber 1, 2020):
Cases ty pes in Phase Three to be presumptively  referred to Mediation include:
• Initial Custody /Visitation cases, with no prior court action/history ; and
• Initial Custody /Visitation/Guardianship cases with prior case history  in either Supreme
or Family  Court; and
• Modification/Violation of custody /visitation order cases with prior history  in
either Supreme or F amily  Court; and
• Child Support Modification/Enforcement (non-willful) proceeding s; and
• Relocation cases.
Up to eight (8) cases p er week will b e presumptively referred  to mediation with the CDRC; Up to fifteen  (15)
cases p er week will b e presumptively referred  to med iation with  a Roster Neu tral.
I.How Presumptive Referrals for Mediation Work
The assig ned Judge or Court Attorney -Referee, or the Support Mag istrate, shall
presumptively  refer parties to the Prog ram where certain criteria are met; however, nothing  limits
parties, on their own, to request referral to the Prog ram for Mediation.
Family  Courts have unique needs compared to other civil courts in that F amily  Court
litigants often appear in Court self-represented, and in most case ty pes before the F amily  Court,
litigants are entitled to the assig nment of counsel if they  meet certain income criteria/g uidelines.
Many  litigants who do not meet the threshold financial criteria for assig ned counsel choose to
remain pro se, as opposed to hiring  attorney s. Thus, unlike in most other civil proceeding s in a
county -level court, many  parties do not have counsel advising  them or representing  their
interests in the litig ation. As such, referrals to mediation must be made in different way s,
depending  on whether the parties are self-represented, represented by  assig ned counsel, or
represented by  privately  retained counsel. According ly, the case will be referred to one or two
tracks: the CDRC track or the Roster of Neutrals track.
A.CDRC Track
Where neither party  is represented by  counsel or both parties are represented by  assig ned
counsel, and where Chambers has identified this case as qualify ing for presumptive mediation,
the Court will send out two documents to the parties/attorney s: (1) a Notice to Appear before the
2
Assig ned J udge, and (2) an Order of Reference directing  the parties/attorney s to eng age in a
mediation with CL USTER, and directing  the parties to contact CL USTER immediately  to
perform a telephonic intake with the CDRC. The parties will perform the intake in advance of
the scheduled court/mediation date.
The parties/attorney s will appear in Court on a date certain before the J udge/Court-
Attorney  Referee/Support Mag istrate for the initial appearance. At the conclusion of that
appearance, the parties will be g iven another court date and sent down the hall to a conf erence
room  in the Rockland County F amily Court to eng age in a free 60-90 minute session with a
mediator from CL USTER.
If the parties are able to resolve all issues with the mediator, the J udge/Court-Attorney
Referee will attempt to recall the case that day  to place the settlement on the record so the matter
will be disposed. I f the parties are unable to settle the matter at the conclusion of the first, free
mediation session, they  will have the option of:
(1)Scheduling  another mediation session with CL USTER in accordance with
CLUSTER’s fee schedule which will take place at the CL USTER offices, or any  other location
to which all the parties and mediator ag ree; however, no adjournment of any  future court dates or
stay of the proceeding s, including  any court-authoriz ed ex chang e of discovery , will be g ranted
for the parties to continue mediation; or
(2)Discontinuing  mediation and appearing  before the Court on the nex t scheduled court
date.
A.Roster Track
Where both parties are represented by  retained counsel, the Court will send out two
documents to the attorney s and parties: (1) a Notice to Appear before the Ass igned J udge/Court-
Attorney  Referee/Support Mag istrate, and (2) an Order of Reference directing  the
parties/attorney s to eng age in a mediation with a Neutral from the Roster of Neutrals, which the
Rockland County  Family  Court and the Administrative J udge for the Ninth J udicial District shall
establish and maintain.1
In order to be elig ible to serve as a Mediator/Neutral and be listed on the Roster, a person
shall possess the following  qualifications and such others as may  hereafter be promulg ated. A
Neutral shall have (a) have completed at least the amount and ty pe of training  required by  Part
1461 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator; (b) have recent ex perience mediating  cases in the
1
 Part 146 requires prospective mediators to have successfully  completed a minimum of forty  (40)
hours of training  in an OCA-sponsored or OCA-recog nized training  program, which includes 24 hours
of training  in basic mediation skills and techniques and 16 hours of training  in the specific mediation
techniques pertaining  to the particular field of expertise (see Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief
Administrator).
3
particular field of ex pertise as mandated by  Part 146; (c) comply  with the Standards of Conduct
for Mediators as set forth in the 9th JD District W ide Rules Applicable to all Mediation and
hereinafter promulg ated; and (d) attend at least six  hours of additional approved training  relevant
to their respective practice areas every  two y ears.
Neutrals may  be removed from the Roster at the discretion of district Administrative J udge.
The Order of Reference shall direct parties to attend an initial, free, 90-minute session
with a Neutral from the Prog ram’s Roster of Neutrals. I f parties wish to continue ADR bey ond
the initial ninety  (90) minute session, they  may continue that session or schedule additional
sessions; however Neutrals shall be entitled to compensation bey ond the initial session in
accordance with the ADR Prog ram rules of the Ninth J udicial District. The Order of Reference
shall also contain an appearance date within thirty  (30) day s as set by  the referring  Judge, Court-
Attorney  Referee, or the Support Mag istrate. The proceeding s on all petitions, including  orders
authoriz ing exchang e of discovery , will not be stayed pending  additional ADR sessions.
At the initial appearance before the Court, the J udge, Court Attorney -Referee or Support
Magistrate shall inquire as whether the parties have already  initiated mediation pursuant to the
Order of Reference, and shall ascertain whether there has been compliance with the Order of
Reference. A future court appearance will be scheduled for the parties to appear in the event that
the matter does not resolve via mediation with a fully -executed stipulation or if the parties wish
to place the terms of a settlement on the Court’s record. B ut ag ain, the proceeding s on all
petitions, including  orders authoriz ing exchang e of discovery , will not be stayed pending
additional ADR sessions.
II.THE ROL E OF  ATTORNEYS F OR THE CHI LD(REN) I N PARTI CIPATI NG IN
MEDI ATION
Not every case referred to mediation will have an Attorney  for the Child(ren) assig ned to
represent the children. Also, Attorney s for Child(ren) are assig ned at various stages of a pending
case.
For cases referred to mediation throug h the CDRC, if an Attorney  for the Child(ren) is
present at the initial appearance, that Attorney ’s presence will be required at the first free
courthouse mediation session with CL USTER, unless the Attorney  and the parties ag ree on the
record before the Court that the Attorney ’s appearance at that initial session is waived.
For those cases referred to mediation with a Roster Neutral in which an Attorney  for the
Child(ren) had been appointed prior to the issuance of the Order of Reference, the initial ADR
session may  not be held without that Attorney ’s presence, unless the parties and the Attorney  for
the Child(ren) ag ree otherwise in writing . If an Attorney  for the Child(ren) is appointed after the
initial ADR session, then any  future ADR sessions scheduled by  the parties must be on notice to
the Attorney  for the Child(ren) who shall attend the session(s) unless all parties, including  the
4
Attorney  for the Child(ren), ag ree in writing  that the Attorney  for the Child(ren)’s presence may
be waived.
III.Prog ram Coordinator(s)
The ADR Prog ram shall be supervised and coordinated by  the Court Attorney  for the
Family  Court J udge assig ned to that case, or shall be supervised by  the Chief/Deputy  Chief
Clerks of the F amily  Court for the Support Mag istrate assig ned to the child support case. Each
of those individuals shall act as the Administrator for the implementation of ADR for each
referred case.
5