SUP REME COURT OF  THE STATE OF  NEW YORK
COMMERCIAL DIVISION - COUNTY OF  WESTCHESTER
HON. LINDA S. JAMIESON
HON. G RETCHEN WALSH
RULES OF  THE COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ALTERNATIVE DISP UTE RESOLUTION P ROG RAM 
PREAMBLE
It is the policy  of the Courts of this State, as set forth in the State Chief Judge’s Excellence
Initiative, to encourag e the resolution of disputes and the early settlement of pending  litigation
throug h various settlement procedures. The following  Rules shall govern  cases which qualify  for
Alterna tive Dispute Resolution (“ADR”) throug h presumptive mediation.  The Rules set forth
herein are intended to apply  in the Commercial Division of the Supreme  Court of Westchester
County .  These Rules supplement and shall be applied in tandem with the Rules of the
Alternative Disp ute Resolution Prog ram for the Ninth Judicial District (the “Ninth JD Rules”). 
Capitaliz ed terms to the ex tent not defined herein are as defined in the Ninth J D Rules.
Rule 1 . Program :
The Commercial Division of the Supreme Court of the State of New York, County  of
Westchester, employ s the Alternative Dispute Resolution Prog ram instituted by the Ninth
Judicial District.  Unless otherwise directed by the Court, cases referred to the Program shall be
mediated.  Cases which qualify for referral to the Prog ram shall be those cases that have been
designated by the Commercial Division as qualify ing for presumptive mediation, as identified in
Rule 2 herein, as well as any cases where all parties have elected to pursue mediation, and any
cases where the Court has ex ercised its discretion to refer the cases to mediation.  
Rule 2 . Cases Qualif ying f or Presum ptive Mediation and Determ ination of  Suitability:
Listed below are those cases which have been desig nated as qualify ing for presumptive
mediation.  All such cases shall be referred to mediation utilizing the procedures and forms
established by the Ninth JD Rules.  Those forms enable parties or their counsel to identify
whether their case qualifies for mediation , following  which the Commercial Division will review
such forms to confirm that the case does qualify , in which event the mediation shall be initiated
and an Order of Reference issued in accordance with the Ninth JD Rules.  The following  cases
are deemed to qualify  for presumptive mediation:
-1-
4180941.v10
(1) corporate dissolutions, internal governance disputes and shareholder derivative actions where
the entity  is closely  held and non-public and there is an ongoing business or personal
relationship among  the parties; 
(2) employ ment agreements/restrictive covenants/unfair competition (whether or not
employ ment-related);
(3) commercial real estate not involving  Yellowstone injunctions;
(4) business trans actions involving  commercial banks or other financial institutions or lenders
not involving  an instrument for the pay ment of money  only ; 
(5) commercial insurance coverag e or environmental insurance coverag e;
(6) construction litig ation;
(7) cases where the amount at issue is less than double the jurisdictional threshold for
Commercial Division cases pending  in W estchester County  Supreme Court;
(8) any case which does not fall into the list of cases above, but where all parties request
mediation, or where the Court directs the case to go to mediation in the exercise of the
Court’s discretion.
Rule 3. Roster of  Mediators and Com pensation:
The Admini strative Judge for the Ninth Judicial District, together with the Justices of the
Commercial Division, shall establish and maintain a Roster of Mediators for the Commercial
Division (“the Roster”).
(i) In order to be eligible to serve as a Mediator and be listed on the Roster, a person shall
possess the following  qualifications and such others as may hereafter be promulg ated. A
mediator must: (a) have completed at least the amount and type of training  required by
Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief Administrator; (b) have recent experience mediating
commercial cases as mandated by Part 146; and (c) comply  with the Commerc ial
Division’s Standards of Conduct for Mediators.
 Part 146 requires prospective mediators to have successfully  comple ted a minimum of forty  (40)
hours of training  in an OCA-sponsored or OCA-recog nized training  program, which includes 24
hours of training  in basic mediation skills and techniques and 16 hours of training  in the specific
mediation techniques pertaining  to commercial litigation (see Part 146 of the Rules of the Chief
Administrator).
-2-
4180941.v10
(ii) Continuing  presence on the Roster is subject to review by the Administrative Judge.
Mediators may  be removed from the Roster at the discretion of the Administrative J udge.
(iii) The Roster will be available throug h the Commercial Division website .
(iv) Unless otherwise directed by the Court, the Mediator shall be compensated in accordance
with the Ninth JD Rules, including  those provisions allowing  for exemptions from
parties having  to pay for mediator compensation and those provisions allowing  for
portions of the Mediator’s time to be non-compensable.
Rule 4. P rocedure; Autom atic Disclosures:
(i) Unless otherwise directed by the Mediator, at least ten days before the first mediation
session, each party  shall deliver to the Mediator a copy of that party ’s marked pleading s
(including  responsive pleading s) together with a pre-me diation memorandum in the form
set forth in the Ninth JD Rules.   Except as otherwise agreed, this memorandum shall not
be served on the adversary  or filed in court, shall be read only by the Mediator, and shall
be destroy ed by  the Mediator immediately  upon completion of the mediation.
(ii) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties and the Medi ator or as directed by the Mediator,
within ten days of the filing  of the Order of Reference pursuant to the Ninth JD Rules, the
parties shall exchang e information as specified in the Mediation Disclosure Protocols
annex ed hereto as Schedule 1.  Disclosure for mediation purpos es shall be consistent with
the efficient resolution of the case.  Unle ss otherwise directed by the Court or Mediator or
agreed to by the parties, the timeframe covering  information to be produced pursuant to the
Mediation Disclosure Protocols shall be from the earliest date by which the statute of
limitations on any  claim asserted in the action beg an to accrue.
(iii) The Justices of the Commercial Division shall have the discretion to modify  the deadlines
for initiation and completion of the mediation process, including  the discretion to limit
required  disclosure or to allow for additional disclosure beyond that which is exchang ed
pursuant to the Mediation Disclosure Protocols prior to the initiation of the mediation
process. 
Rule 5. Continuation of  Mediation af ter Expiration of  the 45-Day P eriod:
If the matter has not been entirely  resolved within the 45-day  period as provided in the Ninth JD
Rules, but the parties and the Mediator believe that it would be beneficial if the mediation
process were to continue, the process may go forward, but in such event, there shall be no
extensio n or stay of the proceeding s unless otherwise provided by the Ninth JD Rules or leave is
granted by  a Justice of the Commercial Division.
Rule 6. F urther Mediation:
-3-
4180941.v10
After completion of the mediation, upon request of a party  or upon its own initiative, the
Commercial Division Justice, in his or her discretion, may issue an order directing  a second
referral to the Program. Any such referral shall be entertained and ordered as early  as practicable
and shall be administered in accordance with these and the Ninth J D Rules.  
Rule 7. Adm inistration of  Program : 
The Prog ram shall be supervised and coordinated by the Principal Court Attorney  for the
Commercial Division Justice assig ned to the case, who shall act as the Administrator for the
implementation of ADR for that case.
Rev. Aug ust 2019
THE COMMERCI AL DIVISION
SUPREME COURT-W ESTCHESTER COUNTY
WESTCHESTER COUNTYCOURTHOUSE 
111 DR. MARTI N LUTHER KI NG, J R. BLVD.
WHITE PL AINS, NEW  YORK 10601
Justice Linda S. Jam ieson
Justice G retchen Walsh
-4-
4180941.v10
Schedule 1
Mediation Disclosure P rotocols 
Commercial Division, Suprem e Court, Westchester County
1.Documents sufficient to establish the subject contract, statu tory cause of action (including
the alleg ed violation), or the relationship between the parties
2.Preliminary  calculation of damag es, including  for counterclaims, cross-claims and third party
actions
3.Proof of any insurance (including  excess) available to satisfy  any cause of action as well as
proof of any  reservation of rig hts or disclaimer of coverag e  
4.Documents sufficient to show any  dispositive affirmative defense
5.For construction disputes, only such documents as are necessary  for the parties and Mediator
to understand the nature and facilitate the resolution of the dispute, such as, for example,
contracts, chang e orders, engineering  reports, desig n documents, project minutes, mechanic’s
liens and if a subcontracto r was replaced, the cost of the replacement subcontractor
6.To ensure that there is no gap in communication, parties should advise their adversary of any
chang e in position reg arding  a previous settlement demand or offer
7.Any other documents that the parties, in consultation with the Mediator at the pre-mediation
conference, ag ree to ex chang e
8.The names and titles of the people who will be attending  the mediation
9.Counsel are, of course, encourag ed to exchang e any documents they believe would be
helpful to the resolution of the dispute
-5-
4180941.v10