SURPEM E CO URT
DUTCH ESS CO UNTY
ALTERNATE DISPUTE RESO LUTIO N PRO GRAM
This Suprem e Court Alternative Dispute Resolution Program  has been initiated with the
goal of  a faster and m ore cost ef ficient m eans of  resolving cases. This is consistent with
The Excellence Initiative of  our Chief  Judge, The Honorable Janet DiFiore. Litigants with
or without an attorney  will be given the opportunity  to m ediate a resolution of  their cases
at every  stage of  the litigation including bef ore, during and af ter discovery . Most cases
will be m ediated by  the Judge and/or the Court Attorney  so that there is no additional cost
for the individual litigants.
Cases appropriate for early  intervention m ediation :
Cases appropriate f or early  intervention m ediation would be identif ied first at the
prelim inary  conf erence. All cases w ould be initially  considered appropriate for early
intervention/m ediation. Excluded f rom mediation would be cases that involve dom estic
violence, cases with an im balance of  power or other such cases, in the court’s discretion
or a party ’s request.
The Prelim inary  conference:
If agreed by  the parties and counsel, or where appropriate, at the direction of  the court,
the Judge should explore settlem ent at that conf erence or set an early  date f or a settlem ent
conference.
Courthouse Coordinators:
The courthouse coordinators would be the Principal Court Attorney  to each of  the 3
Suprem e Court Justices and the Surrogate: David Gandin (Judge Rosa), Shannon Brady
(Judge Acker), Christa Harper (Judge Greenwald) and Eric Conroy  (Judge Hay es).
Initially , the Court Attorney  and/or the Judge would also be the m ediator.
Subject m atter rules:
1. Custody  and Visitation
For custody  and visitation cases, or any  dom estic relations m atter, the judge or court
attorney  would speak f irst with the attorney s separately  from the parties to ensure that the
referral to m ediation is appropriate and that neither party  feels coerced, intim idated or that
there is an im balance of  power. In assessing the custody  and visitation issues the judge
would have to f irst evaluate whether an attorney  for the children should be appointed and
whether f orensic evaluations m ight be necessary . Despite the goal of  swift resolution, the
best interests, em otional and phy sical saf ety of the children rem ain param ount.
2. Contract, tort, personal injury , malpractice, com mercial and all other cases:
These m atters shall be evaluated on a case by  case basis. W ith rare exception, the
attorney s are in the best position to decide whether som e or all discovery  is needed prior
to mediation. At the Prelim inary Conf erence and at any  subsequent Com pliance
Conf erence the court/court attorney  will evaluate whether the case is ripe f or settlem ent
discussions or ref erral to m ediation.
Status/Com pliance Conferences/ Discovery  Protocols Prior to Mediation:
If the parties/counsel did not believe the case could be ef fectively  conf erenced until they
conducted discovery , I would continue to of fer opportunities f or future settlem ent
conferences including
1. post paper discovery : with the court or court attorney
2. post depositions: with the court or court attorney
3. after the com pletion of  all discovery : with the court or court attorney .
Mediators:
The court, in an appropriate case shall,  ref er a m atter to m ediation.  The parties m ay
select a m ediator f rom the Court’s Roster of  Mediators or a private Mediator in
accordance with the tim e frame set f orth in the 9th JD protocols f or ADR.
Alternatives to Mediation:
Should m ediation to f ail, the court shall advise the parties and counsel of  options other
than a standard trial, such as a sum mary jury trial or binding arbitration.