Skip to main content

Main Menu >

Home

The Courts

E-Courts

Representing Yourself

The Law

Jurors

Judges

Legal Profession

Topics A to Z

NYCOURTS.GOV

SEARCH NYCourts.gov

NYCOURTS.GOV

New York State Unified Court System

8th JUDICIAL DISTRICT

8th JD Home

Accessibility (ADA)

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)

Courts by County
                                
                    
        Allegany County
              
                
        Cattaraugus County
              
                
        Chautauqua County
              
                
        Erie County
              
                
        Genesee County
              
                
        Niagara County
              
                
        Orleans County
              
                
        Wyoming County
              
                
        Town & Village Courts

General Information
                                
                    
        Court Structure
              
                
        Court Terms & Holidays
              
                
        District Office
              
                
        Get Notified of Job Opportunities
              
                
        Links
              
                
        Programs, Procedures & Protocols

Judges & Rules
                                
                    
        Supervising Judges
              
                
        Supreme Court Justices
              
                
        IAS Rules

Jurors

Law Library (Buffalo)

Statewide Info

Court Help Center

Free Legal Assistance

Contact Us

Public Access to Virtual Appearances

Children Come First

Introduction

Under Former Administrative Judge Sharon Townsend, the 8th District was selected to develop a pilot project in Erie County entitled “Children Come First”. Judge Townsend appointed Hon. Janice M. Rosa, then the 8th Judicial District Supervising Judge of Matrimonial Matters, to lead the development of this project which assists parents in dealing with conflict after separation in order to protect the needs and interests of the children involved. This program began under Social Worker Noreen Flynn, L.C.S.W. who assisted parents in developing parenting plans in Supreme Court along with the previously established mediation programs through Catholic Charities and the Center for Dispute Resolution that have been in existence in Erie County Family Court. The overall experience of this program has led to swift and comprehensive disposition of these matters.

Currently, the Children come First program is staffed by two licensed social workers: Sarah Lane Koessler, LMSW, Program Supervisor, and Christine Sarzynski, LCSW. The primary functions of the program include: parenting assessments, parenting mediation, and referrals for services in family court and matrimonial matters in the 8th Judicial District.

Additionally, Justice Rosa has overseen the development of Parenting Coordination protocols which also provide for the establishment of a court roster of qualified parenting coordinators who will receive referrals from the Courts in high-conflict cases. The proposed Parenting Coordination protocols and application for Court Roster Parenting Coordinator can be accessed at Parenting Coordination

This project is consistent with the recommendations contained in the 2006 Report of the Matrimonial Commission that was submitted to former Chief Judge Judith Kaye. The Matrimonial Report can be accessed at the OCA website at:

www.nycourts.gov/reports/matrimonialcommissionreport.pdf.

Contact Information

ADR Coordinator

Audrey Rose Herman, Esq.

arherman@nycourts.gov

716-796-6142.

Sarah Lane Koessler, L.C.S.W.

716-845-2187

Christine Sarzynski, LCSW

716-845-9340

Footer menu

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Contact Us