Skip to main content

Main Menu >

Home

The Courts

E-Courts

Representing Yourself

The Law

Jurors

Judges

Legal Profession

Topics A to Z

NYCOURTS.GOV

SEARCH NYCourts.gov

NYCOURTS.GOV

New York State Unified Court System

2nd JD - Civil Term, Kings Supreme Court

Accessibility (ADA)
                                
                    
        Statewide Info
              
                
        Local ADA Info

Departments
                                
                    
        Ex-Parte / Part 72
              
                
        Fiduciary / Part 36
              
                
        Foreclosures
              
                
        Foreclosure Sales
              
                
        Guardianship
              
                
        Help Center
              
                
        Matrimonial / Divorce
              
                
        Mental Hygiene
              
                
        E-file/Motion Support
              
                
        Trial Support
              
                
        Subpoenaed Records

General Info
                                
                    
        Attorney Secure Pass
              
                
        Directions
              
                
        Find Your Next Court Date
              
                
        Frequently Asked Questions
              
                
        General Forms
              
                
        General Information

Judges & Rules
                                
                    
        Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
              
                
        Discovery Part Rules
              
                
        Foreclosure Auction Rules
              
                
        Judges' Part Rules
              
                
        Kings Civil Supreme Rules
              
                
        Summary Jury Trial Rules

Commercial Division

Electronic Filing

Law Library

Links

What's New?

Contact Us / Building Directory
                                
                    
        Building Directory
              
                
        Phone Directory(PDF)

Public Access to Virtual Appearances

Overview

Administration

Address:

360 Adams Street

Brooklyn, NY 11201

Administrative Judge for Civil Matters

Hon. Lawrence Knipel

347-296-1200

Chief Clerk, Civil Term

Charles A. Small, Esq.

347-296-1800

Hours of Operation:

Monday - Friday

9 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Notices

Until Further Notice

Judge Knipel will be presiding over the Central Compliance Conference Part motion calendar. All motions will be taken on submission.

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER REGARDING NOTES OF ISSUE

City Discovery Part

This discovery part hears all discovery motions, preliminary conferences, and compliance conferences. The courtroom is in room 365. The part begins at 9:30 AM.

Mandatory E-filing For Commercial Actions

E-filing is mandatory for all commercial actions where the amount in controversy is $150,000.00 or more.

For more information, see "Electronic Filing" in the left menu.

Welcome

As the Administrative Judge for Civil Matters, I take this opportunity to welcome you to the official website of the Kings County Supreme Court, Civil Term. This courthouse is equipped to handle all non-criminal matters, including name changes, matrimonial matters, foreclosures, mental hygiene applications, elder law cases, and all other civil litigation.

Kings County is the busiest civil term in New York State and we are committed to making it the most user-friendly as well. That commitment is reflected by our courteous and dedicated staff and this user-friendly website. It is our intention to provide quality service to attorneys and all litigants, whether or not you are represented by counsel.

If you are not represented by counsel and need assistance, please visit our Kings Supreme Court Help Center in Room 122C. Please also be aware that the County Clerk's Office and Surrogate's Court are located in this building. Our goal is to make your court experience as smooth and uncomplicated as possible, and we welcome any comments you may have.

Administrative Judge for Civil Matters

Administrative Judge for Civil Matters

2nd Judicial District

Hon. Lawrence Knipel

Footer menu

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Contact Us