Catholic Charities Dispute Resolution Center

Chenango/Delaware/Otsego Counties

176 Main Street

Oneonta, NY 13820

(607) 432-0061

Lois Hubbard, Coordinator

E-Mail

Jennifer Kilts, Case Coordinator

E-Mail

Jordan Fradenburgh, Case Coordinator

E-Mail

Herkimer County

61 West Street

Ilion, NY 13357

(315) 894-9917 ext. 263

Christine Allen, Case Coordinator

E-Mail

Fulton/Montgomery Counties

1 Kimball Street

Amsterdam, NY 12010

(518) 842-4202 ext. 3133 or 3164

Colleen Hayter, Case Coordinator

E-Mail | Cell: (607) 287-5620

Schoharie County

489 West Main Street

Cobleskill, NY 12043

(518) 234-3581

Lois Hubbard,  Coordinator

E-Mail | Cell: (607) 432-0061

___________

Program Director

Will Sawma

E-Mail |  Cell: (607) 386-5579

Forms

and Brochures

DRC Community Referral Forms

DRC Consent Form

Welcome to Mediation

Standards of Conduct CDRC Mediators

Bill of Rights for Children

Planning Guilde - Custody/Visitation

Mediation and Dispute Resolution

Catholic Charities  Dispute Resolution Center offers alternative dispute resolution services in Chenango, Delaware, Fulton, Herkimer,  Montgomery, Otsego and Schoharie Counties. With funding from the New York State Unified Court System, our services include Lemon Law arbitration, Public Housing Fair Hearings, conciliation,  facilitation, and mediation for any type of dispute. Commonly mediated  disputes include custody/visitation, divorce,  landlord/tenant, small claims, special education and  agricultural. Through our services, individuals have the opportunity  to work together to resolve their dispute and create a plan that will work for  those affected and possibly eliminate court appearances.

What is mediation?

What is mediation?

When parties are able to agree, an agreement can be written and in some cases can be submitted to the court where a case is pending. This may eliminate the need for a court appearance.

Participation in mediation is voluntary and confidential.

How does mediation work?

Participants sit down together with the mediators to identify the issues and any areas of conflict, determine goals and explore possible solutions. The mediators work with the participants to ensure equal participation. They DO NOT provide counsel or legal advice.

Conciliation is an alternative form of mediation when  circumstances do not allow for parties to meet face to face.

Who are the mediators?

Mediators are staff and volunteers from the community who have completed an extensive training and apprenticeship program as required by the New York State Unified Court. Mediators are objective, non-judgmental, and impartial. They use their professional expertise and experience to help people listen to each other and understand each other's point of view. They assist parties in creating a mutually acceptable agreement.

How much does it cost?

There is no set fee for mediation. However, we suggest a donation of $10.00. Donations, of any amount, allow us to be able to continue to offer this program in our rural areas without requiring a fee.

Our Services

Virtual Services Available!

Below you will find a list of services the DRC offers -  these services are offered in Chenango, Delaware, Fulton, Herkimer,  Montgomery, Otsego and Schoharie Counties, and   can be scheduled at a convenient time and location.

Custody / Visitation  Mediation

Community  Mediation

Lemon  Law Arbitration

Special  Education Mediation

Agricultural  Mediation

Divorce Mediation

For more information about our services, please  call (607) 432-0061 to speak to one of our Case Managers.

Volunteer opportunities exist for this program.  Please  see the volunteer page for more information.

Custody / Visitation Mediation

Specially trained mediators assist parties to create a parenting plan that is acceptable to both parties and is in the best interest of the children. The agreement may be submitted to Family Court for the Judge to review and could eliminate a court appearance.

The process is informal and is scheduled at a convenient time and place. Cases may be referred from Family Court or individuals can contact us directly.

Community Mediation

Community mediation covers just about every type of dispute.  The DRC handles landlord/tenant,  workplace disputes, merchant/consumer, neighbor/neighbor, and  interpersonal, just to name a few. If you have a small claims case pending, a mediated agreement could eliminate a court appearance.

Public Housing Fair Hearings are held when a tenant or potential tenant has their housing terminated or denied by a Public Housing Authority. DRC contracts with the Housing Authority to oversee the fair hearing process.

Court will always be an option in trying to solve a dispute.

Lemon Law Arbitration

Lemon  Law Arbitration is a  binding and formal process, and involves a hearing, an arbitrator, the vehicle in question, the purchaser and the seller. Often,  the seller will appear with council. Lemon Law Arbitration is referred to DRC by New  York State, which means that if a person wants to participate in a Lemon Law  Arbitration, they must petition New York State first. If granted by New York State, an arbitration can take place.

For more information about the legal requirements of Lemon  Law, please visit the New York State’s Attorney General’s website.

Special Education Mediation

The  Special Education Mediation Program is a program of  the New York State Education Department, Office of Vocational and Educational  Services of Individuals with Disabilities. Special Education Mediation is a  process by which parents of children with disabilities and school districts  meet with a neutral person, a mediator, to work out their differences. It is  often chosen instead of an impartial hearing as a way of resolving  disagreements about a student’s special education placement, services,  evaluation, or classification. In most cases, the mediator is able to help  develop a solution that is acceptable to both the parent and school in a way  that:

Allows all concerns to be heard

Builds trust and improves communication

Explores creative solutions

Gives everyone a chance to have an equal say in all  decisions

Mediation is a free and voluntary process, and although  there may be a resolution at the end of the mediation, the mediator does not  make any decisions or judgments. You do not lose in mediation because you only  sign the agreement if you agree to what is written.

The mediators have an understanding of special education law  and the school systems of New York State. Special Education Mediators are not  employed by either school districts or the New York State Education Department.

Assuming an agreement is reached; the final written  agreement is binding upon the parties and is enforceable in court. All  discussions and notes from the mediation are confidential and cannot be used as  evidence in any further proceedings. Instead of going through the formal  channels, why not try to settle things in a less confrontational way?

For more information, please feel free to look online  at the

New York State Dispute Resolution Association, Inc.

Agricultural Mediation

Agricultural  mediation is a tool for farmers, agribusiness and others in the agricultural  community to talk about difficult subjects and to reach fair and workable  solutions without involving outside authorities. Mediation can help people  solve problems, avoid escalating conflict, reduce stress, and save time and  money. The process is confidential and convenient. Free or low cost services  are available in every county of New York State.

A mediator helps you communicate clearly, figure out what  you really want, and negotiate effectively. All of the mediators used are  local, neutral and do not make judgments or decide the outcome of the  mediation. The mediators are present to help the parties communicate, allowing  those parties who are directly involved in the dispute make the decisions and  solve the problems for themselves.

The list of disputes that can be mediated is endless, but  here are some examples: loans or debts, neighbor complaints, small claims,  labor problems,  divorce, farm business  plan, family farm succession and USDA appeals. This service is free and  confidential, so you have absolutely nothing to lose by trying to solve a  dispute using mediation.

For more information about this, and other special  agricultural programs offered in New York State go to  The New York State Agriculture Mediation Program.

Divorce Mediation

Divorce Mediation is a comprehensive mediation process that can be cost effective and timely. The process includes an information session, custody/visitation, child support, spousal maintenance, and the division of property. Cost is by the hour based on a sliding fee scale. The number of mediation sessions vary.

Group information sessions are offered on a monthly basis  for couples who want information about the process.

Participants will receive a workbook and learn about what is  needed to go through the divorce mediation process.

There is a $100 fee to attend an information session.    Mediation Services are based on a sliding fee scale.

Current and past issues of the Dispute Resolution Program Newsletter are available  online .

Catholic Charities of Delaware, Otsego, and Schoharie Counties