Skip to main content

Main Menu >

Home

The Courts

E-Courts

Representing Yourself

The Law

Jurors

Judges

Legal Profession

Topics A to Z

NYCOURTS.GOV

SEARCH NYCourts.gov

NYCOURTS.GOV

New York State Unified Court System

ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION

ADR Home
                                
                    
        What Is ADR
              
                
        Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution

Find a Mediator / ADR Services
                                
                    
        ADR for Court Cases
              
                
        Mediation 
              
                
        Other ADR Processes

Become a Mediator / ADR Neutral 
                                
                    
        Qualifications
              
                
        Volunteer
              
                
        Mediator Application

Training and Education
                                
                    
        Find a Training
              
                
        Trainer Resources

Community Dispute Resolution Centers
                                
                    
        CDRC Services
              
                
        Find a CDRC
              
                
        Volunteer
              
                
        Publications and Resources

ADR Practitioner Resources

Contact Us
                                
                    
        About Us
              
                
        Mediator Complaints

Court-Based ADR Programs: New York City

Criminal Court

The New York City Criminal Court may refer certain disputes to

Community Dispute Resolution Centers for mediation services. These disputes may be between neighbors, acquaintances, family members, landlords and tenants, or consumers and merchants.

Family Court

New York City Family Court offers

free mediation services for parenting issues in custody and visitation cases.

Civil Court

The Civil Court of the City of New York handles civil cases involving amounts up to $50,000 and other civil matters referred to it by the Supreme Court. It includes a small claims part for informal dispositions of matters not exceeding $10,000 and a housing part for landlord-tenant matters of unlimited amounts and housing code violations. NYC Civil Court has various ADR programs available:

Housing Court – Resolution Part

A 

Resolution Part is a courtroom where the landlord and tenant can discuss their differences before a Judge or Court Attorney to see if an agreement can be reached to settle the dispute.

Small Claims Mediation

Each borough has a

Small Claims mediation program. For more information, you may reach out to the program coordinator at

smclaimsmediation-nyc@nycourts.gov.

Supreme Court, Civil

NYC Supreme Civil consists of trial courts that see a variety of cases including commercial, matrimonial (divorce), and personal injury. Find out more about the ADR Programs in NYC Supreme courts:

Bronx

Bronx Supreme Court, Civil

ADR Coordinator: Albert Levi, Esq.

Email: BXSUPADR@nycourts.gov

Bronx Supreme Court, Matrimonial

ADR Coordinator: Jessica Brenes, Esq.

Email:

Email:

BXSUPADRMAT@nycourts.gov

Brooklyn

Kings County Supreme Court, Civil

ADR Coordinator: Kelechi Acholonu, Esq.

Email:

Email:

ADR-2JD@nycourts.gov

Manhattan

New York County Supreme Court, Civil

ADR Coordinator: Dejana Perrone, Esq.

Email: ADR-1JD@nycourts.gov

Early Settlement Conferences

For certain trial-ready, post-Note-of-Issue civil cases, court staff meet with parties and counsel to try to help them reach a settlement.

For certain trial-ready, post-Note-of-Issue civil cases, court staff meet with parties and counsel to try to help them reach a settlement.

The court staff person, who is neutral, may evaluate strengths and weaknesses of claims and offer an opinion about likely court outcomes.

The court staff person may be an experienced attorney or judge designated for this purpose.

The process often helps parties reach a settlement. Parties with questions should call 646-386-3689 or 646-386-3683.

Queens

Queens Supreme Court, Civil

ADR Coordinator: Linda Dardis, Esq.

Supreme Court, Civil Branch, Queens County

Queens County Courthouse

88-11 Sutphin Blvd., Room 511

Jamaica, NY 11435

Email: qscadr@nycourts.gov

Phone: (718) 298-1031

The Queens County Supreme Court Commercial Division ADR Program

The Queens County Matrimonial Mediation Program

helps divorcing couples with cases in court come to agreements on parenting and economic matters.

Staten Island

Richmond County Supreme Court, Civil

ADR Coordinator: Irini N. Bekhit, Esq.

Email: ADR-13JD@nycourts.gov

Surrogate’s Court

The Surrogate’s Courts hear cases involving the affairs of decedents, including the probate of wills and the administration of estates. Find out about the Bronx Surrogate’s ADR Program or the Queens Surrogate's Mediation Program. For Brooklyn, Manhattan, or Staten Island, please contact ADR-Surrogates-NYC@nycourts.gov

Footer menu

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Contact Us