Skip to main content

Main Menu >

Home

The Courts

E-Courts

Representing Yourself

The Law

Jurors

Judges

Legal Profession

Topics A to Z

NYCOURTS.GOV

SEARCH NYCourts.gov

NYCOURTS.GOV

New York State Unified Court System

Divorce

Divorce Resources Home

Statewide Coordinating Judge for Matrimonial Matters

Covid-19 Divorce Resources

Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
                                
                    
        Divorce Mediation

Divorce Forms & Instructions
                                
                    
        Uncontested Divorce Forms Instructions
              
                
        Uncontested Divorce Packet Forms
              
                
        DIY Uncontested Divorce
              
                
        Forms for Contested Cases

Uncontested Joint Divorce Pilot Project

Divorce in Your County

Divorce Info & FAQ's

Domestic Violence

Finding a Lawyer

Glossary of Legal Terms

Resources for Unrepresented

Parent Resources

Supreme Court Contact Info

Resources for Judges & Attorneys

Maintenance & Child Support Tools

Child Support Resources

Parentage Proceedings

Adult Dependent Support

Divorce Forms

The New York State Unified Court System offers free instruction booklets and forms for people starting a divorce.

Before you use the booklets and forms, we strongly suggest that you give serious thought to using a lawyer for your divorce, even if you believe that your divorce will be “uncontested” (i.e., your spouse will not oppose the divorce in any way). There can be a lot more to think about than just ending the marriage and filling out court papers. (For example, there may be property to divide between you and your spouse, or you may need an Order of Protection and/or child support and other financial support, among other things.)

If you are unsure how to find a lawyer, these resources can help you:

Call the New York State Bar Association Lawyer Referral Service (toll free) at 1-800-342-3661;

Go to lawhelp.org if you cannot afford a lawyer;

Visit the court system's courthelp website;

Contact your local bar association for a referral;

If you live in the New York City area, go to the Collaborative Family Law Center to learn if you may be eligible for reduced-fee or free collaborative law services through a court-sponsored pilot program.

Ask at any courthouse about lawyer referral services.

Please read the instructions below that fit your situation

Please read the instructions below that fit your situation

BEFORE filling out the forms.

Divorce

General Info

Instructions & Forms

Official Statewide Forms:

For attorneys and self-represented litigants

Valid throughout New York State

Required by Court Rules

Form Name 
			 PDF 
			 WPD 
			 DOC 
			 Fillable PDF 
		 Net Worth Statement  rev.   6/2016, eff. 8/1/16 
			 
			 
			 
			 * 
		 
			 Preliminary Conference Order  eff. 7/1/22 

			 Warning: 
			Prior to using this form, please contact your local Supreme Court Clerk’s Office to determine if they have additional requirements to be added in an Addendum to the form, if any. 
			 
			 
			   
			 
			 * 
		 SC-1 Temporary Order of Protection (Supreme Court) 
			 
			 
			   
			   
		 SC-2 Order of Protection (Supreme Court) 
			 
			 
			   
			   
		 SC-3 Firearms Seizure Order ( Supreme Court)

* Fillable PDF Forms do not work in FireFoxIMPORTANT: You can use either the Adobe Acrobat or Foxit Reader to fill out the application. To save data entered in your form, you must use the FREE Foxit Reader or Foxit Phantom (paid product).Using Foxit Reader* (a free & easy to download Reader):
	First, download and save the application to your local computer. Next, install Foxit, using these instructions.
	*You must use Microsoft's Internet Explorer Browser when working with Foxit.

Forms For Privately Paid Law Guardians (in the 1st, 2nd, and 4th Departments

Footer menu

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Contact Us