Skip to main content

Main Menu >

Home

The Courts

E-Courts

Representing Yourself

The Law

Jurors

Judges

Legal Profession

Topics A to Z

NYCOURTS.GOV

SEARCH NYCourts.gov

NYCOURTS.GOV

New York State Unified Court System

ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION

ADR Home
                                
                    
        What Is ADR
              
                
        Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution

Find a Mediator / ADR Services
                                
                    
        ADR for Court Cases
              
                
        Mediation 
              
                
        Other ADR Processes

Become a Mediator / ADR Neutral 
                                
                    
        Qualifications
              
                
        Volunteer
              
                
        Mediator Application

Training and Education
                                
                    
        Find a Training
              
                
        Trainer Resources

Community Dispute Resolution Centers
                                
                    
        CDRC Services
              
                
        Find a CDRC
              
                
        Volunteer
              
                
        Publications and Resources

ADR Practitioner Resources

Contact Us
                                
                    
        About Us
              
                
        Mediator Complaints

Mediator Complaints

The New York State Unified Court System is committed to ensuring a quality process for all participants in a court-referred mediation. We welcome input from anyone who has concerns about their court-referred mediator. To make a complaint about your court-referred mediator, please contact the District Administrative Judge. If you need help, you may ask your local ADR Coordinator. Find the email address for your ADR Coordinator.

Please do not use this complaint process if your complaint is about the mediator’s fee; about something other than the mediator’s behavior or actions; or if it is after 60 days from the date that you last mediated or spoke with your mediator.

Exception to the 60-day restriction: if you discovered the mediator misconduct after the 60 days, you can make your complaint and also explain why you were unable to discover the alleged misconduct until after 60 days from the date you last mediated or spoke with the mediator.

Decision Process

The District Administrative Judge will review your complaint and make a decision in a way the District Administrative Judge thinks is appropriate.  The District Administrative Judge may contact the mediator, you, the other person in your case, court staff, or the local ADR Coordinator. The District Administrative Judge can also ask a committee of mediation experts for recommendations.

Types of Decisions

The District Administrative Judge can decide that the mediator should:

1. Take further training; and/ or

2. Be observed mediating by an experienced mediator; and/ or

3. Stop mediating for the court until the mediator gets more training, experience or guidance; and/ or

4. Stop mediating for the court completely;

The District Administrative Judge can also make other decisions about the mediator.

After the District Administrative Judge Makes a Decision

Once the District Administrative Judge makes a decision, the Coordinator may notify you.  The District Administrative Judge’s decision is final.

Footer menu

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Contact Us