Skip to main content

Main Menu >

Home

The Courts

E-Courts

Representing Yourself

The Law

Jurors

Judges

Legal Profession

Topics A to Z

NYCOURTS.GOV

SEARCH NYCourts.gov

NYCOURTS.GOV

New York State Unified Court System

NEW YORK STATE COURT OF CLAIMS

Home

Accessibility (ADA)

E-filing
                                
                    
        Instructions
              
                
        NYSCEF Filing Page

Fax Filing
                                
                    
        Instructions
              
                
        Cover Sheet

Practice
                                
                    
        Court of Claims Act
              
                
        Uniform Rules
              
                
        Motion Practice

Forms

Courtroom Technology
                                
                    
        Overview
              
                
        Albany, Hauppauge, NYC, Syracuse
              
                
        Buffalo
              
                
        Rochester
              
                
        White Plains
              
                
        Wireless Internet Access

Decisions
                                
                    
        Overview
              
                
        Searchable Database
              
                
        New York Official Reports

Trial Transcripts

Links of Interest

Frequently Asked Questions

Contact Us
                                
                    
        Clerk of the Court
              
                
        Judges' Chambers

Overview

Fax Filing Update

Effective September 1, 2021, the Court of Claims can no longer accept payment of filing fees by fax. The $50.00 filing fee must be paid in advance using the Court's online payment system.

For Claims to be filed by fax beginning September 1, 2021:

Prior to filing a Claim, please visit the online payment page at https://iappscontent.courts.state.ny.us/NYSCEF/live/edds.htm and complete payment. Once payment is completed, a confirmation/receipt number will be generated. Please include the confirmation/receipt number in the appropriate field on the Filing Fax Cover Sheet when faxing the Claim.

**CLAIMS SUBMITTED WITHOUT CONFIRMATION OF ONLINE PAYMENT WILL NOT BE FILED**

Electronic Filing Update

New York State Electronic Filing System (NYSCEF)

Pursuant to the Administrative Order of Acting Presiding Judge Richard E. Sise, effective February 23, 2021, all categories of claims in all districts of the Court of Claims are eligible for consensual/voluntary electronic filing in the New York State Electronic Filing System (NYSCEF).

Please note: Motions for Permission to File Late Claims, other pre-action applications and Special Proceedings (i.e., EDPL ยง 304 [E] distribution proceedings) are not eligible for NYSCEF at this time.

The Electronic Document Delivery System (EDDS) allows you to electronically deliver the following items to the court:

PDF of a Trial Exhibit (at the direction of the Court only),

Stipulation or Letter Application to Convert a claim to NYSCEF,

Documents related to a Motion for Permission to File a Late Claim or other pre-action application, and

Documents related to a Special Proceedings (i.e., EDPL ยง 304 [E] distribution proceeding).

Please note: EDDS does not replace and may not substitute for filing under the New York State Courts Electronic Filing System (NYSCEF). Therefore, it should not be used in matters where NYSCEF is available. View the

EDDS Notice for more information. If you do not have a lawyer and have not made your court papers, visit the

CourtHelp website or the

DIY (Do-It-Yourself) Forms page.

Send a Document with EDDS

Welcome

The New York State Court of Claims is the exclusive forum for civil litigation seeking damages against the State of New York or certain other State-related entities such as the New York State Thruway Authority, the City University of New York, the Olympic Regional Development Authority, the Roswell Park Cancer Institute Corporation and the New York State Power Authority (claims for the appropriation of real property only).

The Court of Claims has no jurisdiction over any city, county or town government, or over any individual defendant. For information on New York law generally, see Cornell Law School's Legal Information Institute's New York page.

Those unfamiliar with the Court of Claims should start by reading the Frequently Asked Questions.

Administration

Address

Robert Abrams Building for Law & Justice

P.O. Box 7344

Capitol Station

Albany, NY 12224

Phone

518-432-3411

Acting Presiding Judge

Richard E. Sise

Chief Clerk

Eileen F. Fazzone

Hours of Operation

Monday - Friday 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.

(except

State holidays)

What's New

Practice Alert - 22 NYCRR ยง 206.5

Rule 206.5 - Papers Filed with the Court - has been amended to add a new subsection (e) requiring attorneys to omit or redact certain confidential personal information from court filings in the Court of Claims. This rule is effective as of April 15, 2015 and applies to both e-filed and paper-filed cases.

Please refer to the NYSCEF site for information for e-filed claims.

A recommended Redaction Cover Page form is available for use by parties filing paper-filed court documents subject to the rule.

In addition, a Unified Court System training video, addressing the corresponding Supreme and County Court rule (22 NYCRR 202.5[e]), is available.

Training Video:

Public Access Version (Run time: 43 minutes)

Internal version with transcripts (login with UCS Microsoft account)

Important

The Clerk's office does not accept submissions for filing via e-mail.

This is NOT Small Claims court.

Information on Small Claims courts may be obtained at the following sites:

Small Claims in N.Y. City

Small Claims outside of N.Y. City

The forms provided at this site are unofficial and non-mandatory. They are designed primarily for self-represented (pro se) claimants. They are PDF documents and require Adobe Acrobat Reader.

Important Notice about "Scam" Emails

Footer menu

Copyright

Privacy Policy

Accessibility

Contact Us