Our Services

Conflict Resolution

	Conflict Resolution Services
	30-Hour Virtual Basic Mediation Training

Counseling

Domestic Violence Help

	Education & Training
	Emergency Services
	Help a Loved One
	Haven House Chat System
	Ongoing Support
	Support Our Program
	Toyland Wishlist

Employee Assistance Program

Family Support Services

	Preventive Services
	Home and Community Support Services
	Family Support Services FAQ

Foster Care and Adoption

	FAQ
	Inquiry Form

Residential Treatment

	Residential FAQ
	Children’s Nutrition Review

Special Education

Other Links

Donate

News

The Center for Resolution + Justice provides mediation and workshops to help arrive at collaborative, amicable solutions.

The Center for Resolution + Justice (CRJ) is a community-based dispute resolution program and conflict resolution and mediation skills training center. It offers a wide range of alternative dispute resolution services and conflict management and mediation training programs to individuals and organizations. CRJ’s services are designed to be alternatives to formal court proceedings for those seeking to resolve interpersonal conflicts and disputes. CRJ operates under contract with the New York State Unified Court System’s Office of Court Administration’s Office of ADR Program and Court Improvement.

CRJ is committed to promoting peaceful conflict resolution in our communities. For more than 30 years, we have offered mediation programs, training, and consultation services throughout the eight-county Western New York region. Since 2005, Child and Family Services has operated CRJ.

As a Community Dispute Resolution Center, we offer low-cost to no-cost programs that can help individuals resolve a wide range of disputes, including neighborhood, housing, property, school, family/parenting, small claims, and relationship conflicts. We also offer programs in areas such as agricultural mediation, divorce mediation, workplace mediation, special education mediation, lemon law arbitration, conflict coaching, and restorative practices.

Service Areas

CRJ provides conflict resolution services to residents of Erie, Niagara, Orleans, Genesee, Wyoming, Chautauqua, Cattaraugus, and Allegany counties.

Contact Us:

Downtown Buffalo Office:

Tri-Main Center

2495 Main Street, Suite 357

Buffalo, New York 14214

(716) 362-2323

Family Court:

Erie County Family Court

Part 14 – Mediation Office

Buffalo, NY 14202

(716) 362-2323

Jamestown Office:

Jamestown City Hall

200 East Third Street, 3rd Floor

Jamestown, New York 14701

(716) 362-2323

To request mediation or to learn more, contact us directly at mediate@cfsbny.org.