Turn Your Biggest Language Challenges Into Growth Opportunities

Interpretation
                        
                        
                          
                          Learn More
                        
                      

                      

                      
                      
                        Get the expertise you need to overcome language barriers 24/7/365 with On-Demand and OnSite Interpreting in 240+ languages.

Localization
                        
                        
                          
                          Learn More
                        
                      

                      

                      
                      
                        Provide high-quality, accurate translations that resonate with your audience in 290+ languages.

Translation
                        
                        
                          
                          Learn More
                        
                      

                      

                      
                      
                        Localize your print and digital content for any global market with the support of 5,000+ professional linguists.

Testing & Training
                        
                        
                          
                          Learn More
                        
                      

                      

                      
                      
                        Ensure your frontline bilingual staff and interpreters have the skills they need to represent your organization in 50+ languages.

35,000+
                  
                
                
                
                  
                    Professionally trained linguists worldwide ready to help

290+
                  
                
                
                
                  
                    Languages in which our expert translators are fluent

24/7
                  
                
                
                
                  
                    Language access coverage for your organization and team

Industry expertise

Tell Your Customers, “290+ Languages Welcome Here”

LanguageLine knows your industry’s specific terminology and can enable total understanding for your customers, patients, and constituents. We’ve been partnering with nearly every Fortune 100 company for decades in healthcare, financial services, technology, insurance, telecommunications, aerospace, defense, and food and drug industries. Discover how we can help your organization solve its language access challenges.

Why the World's Top Companies Choose LanguageLine

World-Class Linguists

You deserve to work with the world's finest interpreters and translators. Our linguists must meet the industry's most rigorous standards of excellence.

Learn More

Pioneering Technology

Our services are transformational. We have a long history of innovating industry-leading technology and new language access pathways.

Learn More

Rigorous Security

Safeguarding your organization’s private information and supporting regulatory compliance are top priorities and a subject we treat with the gravity it deserves.

Learn More

24/7/365

Day or night, we're here to support your communication with the increasingly diverse communities you serve.

Learn More

Unrivaled Experience

We founded the language access industry in 1982. Each year we handle 64+ million interactions–that’s more than one mutual understanding created every second.

Learn More

Industry-Leading Scalability

The need for language access is unpredictable. Our solutions meet your demands without fail, no matter how large or unexpected they may be.

Learn More

Let’s Talk Solutions

Learn how to ensure your employees, teams, and customers can fully understand each other. Read our On-Demand Services brochure or choose a time to speak with our experts about options for solving your language access challenges and moving to the next level.

Residents of Queens speak over 190 languages and with the introduction of LanguageLine at all our locations, our customers can now receive assistance in their preferred language with just a phone call from a staff member to a live interpreter. Now, we can truly say that at Queens Public Library, we speak your language.
                
                "

— Assistant Director, Queens Public Library

The staff at LanguageLine has an exceptional overall knowledge base for translation across various media. Working with their staff has been ideal as the project management is handled with great care and attention to detail. I cannot thank them enough for their guidance and assistance in creating a more welcoming experience for our visitors who do not speak English.
                
                "

— Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco

With this technology, we have no excuse to be delayed due to language barriers. This solution plays a critical role in helping us care for patients and it can even be lifesaving.
                
                "

— Patient Experience Manager, New York-based ambulatory surgery center

Resource Center

Deliver Total Understanding in Seconds

Tap into a wide range of free resources to help your organization construct and launch a comprehensive language access solution for your customers, patients, and clients. These eBooks, guides, webinars, videos, blog posts, and more will provide the insights and information you need to get started.

Close Pop-up
      
      
      
        
          Need an Interpreter Now?
        
      

      
        Engage with a live, professional interpreter on-demand in more than 240 languages. No minimums. Pay by credit card.
        
        
          
        
      
      
        
          Pay only for the minutes you use, billed to your credit card. Call anytime from any phone or use the app on any device, 24/7.
Simply complete the form below to get started. Need a long-term interpreting solution? Contact us here to discuss your options.
        
        
      
    
    
    
      #pardot-custom-popup-form-ec108b60-a6a5-45e6-9d9a-f7f3844ba85b {
        min-height: 10rem;
      }

      #pardot-custom-popup-form-ec108b60-a6a5-45e6-9d9a-f7f3844ba85b .submitted-message {
        display: none;
      }